Judge on a Boat


Prologue

Falling, falling, falling, that was what was happening,
of course falling was what a planetary drop pod was
for but this was the bad falling, the kind which could
kill you, and her brain - a primitive simian derivative
that processed "falling" extremely well, falling being
a work-related risk for swinging around on trees - was
putting out distress codes, feeding nasty hormones into
her bloodstream, which really necessitated triggering
her deep rationality training, but she didn't really
remember to do that part.

But she survived, and in the end, that was what a brain
was for.

Rationality was for winning.  And perhaps in retrospect
the flight-or-fight response had been the right thing to
do, at least she survived...

Although in retrospect, maybe she should have forked over
the added price for the safer space elevator.


Chapter 1

Emmanuel Verrens woke with a start when Judge David Adams'
receptionist spoke his name, indicating that his meeting
with the august Fifth-rank Lord Judge was to start.

Emmanuel Verrens was a young Judge, of the interplanetary
order of Judges.  As yet unranked, his status newly minted
with his recent examination.

He had been summoned for a meeting, topic unspecified except
for a vague "regarding your examination and recent promotion
to unranked Judge", and his rationality training suggested
that this summons, so recently after his examination and
promotion, was not good.  It was less good, too, that now
he had arrived at the appointed time, he had been asked to
wait, and was still waiting almost an hour later.

Still, there was insufficient evidence that it was something
specifically to fear, and so Verrens had
clamped down on his misgivings, invoking some of the
standard rationality forms developed against fear.  Don't
fear failure.  Mantras to be repeated as a background thought
loop, to keep the fear at bay, deeply ingrained training that
was easy to maintain.  Special thought processes designed
and refined to keep himself sane against fear.  It was easy,
the little fear was no big deal, and thus Verrens was quite
sane, even as his appointed time came and went, and he was
still in the waiting room.

He'd even managed to nap a little, out of sheer boredom, that
was how little the fear got through his trained defenses
against it.

Verrens got up, nodded, and entered the office of Judge
David Adams.


Chapter 2

Nicole Angel awoke to a blissful, swaying feeling, found her
hand clutched tight to some rubber, or probably synthetic
plastic, and saw the ocean surrounding her.

Memory came flooding back.

She had been on the way to her standardized Judgment Acceptance
examination, back on Old Earth, from her birthplace at Mars
Lagrange 1.  The trip was costly, involving an actual drop into and
(of course) liftoff from a planetary gravity well, and Earth was
still the heaviest gravity well inhabited by humans, and was
still the cultural center of Humanity, which meant that the trip
was quite expensive.

But passing the standard test and becoming a Judge was supposed
to be worth that, and more.

She'd crammed - rationality senseis clucked at students who did
so, but that attractor state (defer things later! You Ain't Gonna
Need It!) still attracted human beings like flies to honey, or
more likely vinegar, but as irrationalities went cramming was a
just a slight inefficiency, so rationality senseis just clucked
at it - and of course like many she even dipped a little into
the Dark Arts, using rote memorization instead of actual
understanding.  Then she kissed her family goodbye, promising to
come back a fully-fledged Judge Of No Rank.

The actual trip through space was uneventful - her seat companion
was a young female Engineer, sponsored by her home company for
training at Earth, and somewhere nearby, Nicole had noticed,
had been a somewhat attractive young male whose bearing suggested
"Executor", with whom Nicole had kept slight eye contact a few
seconds more than strictly uninterested strangerness warranted.

Then came the failed drop, and now this, floating somehow on an
inflatable raft with two strangers and a slightly-more-familiar
acquaintance, her Engineer seat companion of the company Earth
training trip.

No, make that two strangers, her Engineer acquaintance, and that
somewhat attractive maybe Executor with whom Nicole had maybe
flirted, hanging off the other side of the raft, his chest and
head inside, but his lower torso and legs dipped into the ocean.

A total of five people.

The Engineer tapped her shoulder, and then whispered, "Judge,
we have a problem.  This raft's capacity is four people."


Chapter 3

"Good Afternoon, Judge Adams," he said.

"Good Afternoon.  Have a seat," answered Adams.

It wasn't a personal office, as it turned out.  Or if it was,
then it was a rather strange one.  Had Verrens been asked his
opinion, it was actually a meeting room, with a long table,
several chairs, a whiteboard, and a screen.

Judge David Adams, of Fifth Rank, sat near one end, with several
printed papers lying spread out in front of him.  Adams was
indicating a seat just across his, so Verrens sat into it.
There was silence for a moment, and then -

"Here," said Adams, handing over a few papers, "is a manuscript -
ostensibly of a novel - regarding a Judge, or rather, an aspiring
Judge trainee.  As you yourself was, just recently, prior to
your own examination here on Earth.  Think of it as an informal
final examination for yourself."

Verrens took the papers.  Was Adams pulling rank and trying to
make him some kind of early proofreader for his own novel?

It started, "Falling, falling, falling, that was what was
happening, of course falling was what a planetary drop pod
was for but this was the bad falling..."

Verrens asked, "Judge, what is this for?"

"It's being proposed as a form of training, and potentially
testing, for student Judges.  Informally, you are here since,
until recently, you were a student Judge, and thus we would
value your input about this manuscript," said Adams.

"I see," said Verrens, ruffling some pages.  "Out of
curiousity, is this based on, say, a true story?"

"You could say that," said Adams.  "So true, in fact, that
we can even trace the thoughts of the main character."

"Ah," was all Verrens could say.

He read for a moment.

"Ah," said Adams, "I see you have had speed reader training,
Judge.  That is fortunate.  Perhaps we can complete our
analysis of this novel in one sitting."

"Yes, Judge," said Verrens.  "I studied it fully.  Speed
up saccades, eliminate subvocalization, lengthen
fixations, and practice, practice, practice..."

"That's good," answered Adams.  "I myself am just starting
speed reading training.  And just in time too, since I
must read many more of these novels, of various authorships
and variations in version.  And interview many different
new Judges like yourself, in order to gain different views
on the novel."


Chapter 4

"I'm not a Judge!" Nicole whispered back urgently.  "I'm
just a candidate for -"

"Well, you're the nearest thing to a Judge we have right
now," the Engineer answered back just as urgently.  "I
asked.  The other woman is a Medic, the man in the boat
is an accountant, and the man hanging onto our boat for
dear life is an Executor.  You're the nearest to a Judge
we have right now.  So.  I'm asking you, formally, for a
Judgment, on a matter of life and death.  How should we
choose who to kick off this boat, Judge?  There's five of
us, the boat holds four, and -"

"Can't this boat really hold five?  Especially with one of
those five being technically outside the boat anyway?"
There were safety margins, weren't there?  Surely an
Engineer would know that -

"Normally it can," said the Engineer.  "That's why I
pulled the Executor close.  I couldn't pull him all the
way in, I'm not physically strong enough, especially
last night, and he's a heavy guy.  But the boat seems
to have a slow leak -"

"All right, how about if we all do what the Executor
is doing?  Hang off the side of the boat?"

The Engineer paused.

"Plausible," she said.  "But Judge, consider - currently
with only one extra passenger hanging off the side of
the boat, we're already experiencing a slow leak.  We
could all hang off the side of the boat, but what if
that doesn't stop the leaking?  That's highly likely,
too.  If we're not rescued soon, we may have to sacrifice
one of us so that the raft doesn't sink completely.  It's
a metal lined rubber craft, so below a certain air
pressure in the bladder it will sink.  Now I'm asking
you, formally, for a Judgment, on a matter of life and
death.  In the future, we may need to kick off one of our
number.  How should we choose who to kick off this boat,
Judge?  Let this be a precommitment to a method, specified
by a Judge, that binds us all."

But Nicole wasn't a Judge.

It didn't even matter that she hadn't passed, or even
taken, the Judge Acceptance Exam.  She knew she had the
knowledge and the training, and if she had taken it, the
chances were good that she would pass and be promoted to
an unranked Judge.

But passing a test did not make you a Judge, not really.

It was rather the community and culture of the Judges
that defined your identity as a Judge.

Oh, the test was thorough.  Written exams, and even
scanning of your brain's morality cores, at least those
already identified by Neurology Scientists.  Practice
mock tests, even - the Sociology Scientists were paid
handsomely to think up of new tests each year that
would look innocuous to even the most high-strung
Judge examinee, but which would reveal the inner
workings of their morality cores almost as well as, or
(it was reputed) even better than the Neurologist's
best scans.

And once you passed, the eyes of every other living
Judge were upon you and every moral decision over
which you passed Judgment...

Cameras were ubiquitous all over Humanity's inhabited
areas.  By law, all cameras were to be marked and
readily visible as such, and all were accessible to
the public.  Spy cameras, unmarked and hidden, or
accessible only to certain groups or individuals,
were highly illegal and always searched for by the
Hackers; the Sousveillance Law that banned hidden
cameras and required public access was the only
existing law that crossed geopolitical boundaries,
and the only one allowed to mention the death
penalty as a possible punishment.

Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?  Why, every watcher
was watched by fellow watchers, and every person
capable of minimum reason - and this category was
very broad indeed - was a watcher.

And every Judge was judged by every other Judge.

A Judge gained rank by a Formal Challenge of
another Judge's Judgment.  Such a Formal
Challenge of Judgment was an assertion that the
Judgment had been faulty.  Records of the decision,
as well as the particular details of the issue to
be decided, were often available from the
ubiquitous cameras all over inhabited space.

And once such a case was brought to light, Judges
all over Humanity's domain were invited to vote
on whether to strip a rank from challenger, or
from the challenged.  The stripped rank would be
awarded to the other.

A Judge of No Rank would lose his or her vocation,
if he or she lost a Formal Challenge of Judgment.
Slightly more than half the Judges in existence at
any one time would be of No Rank.  The other
remaining half were composed almost entirely of
First Rank.  A very few achieved higher ranks.

Rank was a score, but by law Judges were paid
based on age and typical living expenses in their
registered living area.  But a higher rank still
meant that you had a safety margin, in case of an
error in Judgment.

And without that community of Judges watching over
your shoulder, you couldn't be a Judge, not
really.  With the respect accorded to Judges in
Humanity's culture, and the built-in selfishness
circuits of your simian-derived brain, you could
only be a tyrant.  The existence of watching
peers balanced out against both forces.

There were no cameras on the boat.  So, barring
illegal unmarked cameras, no one could ever see
the details of Nicole's Judgment.


Chapter 5

Emmanuel Verrens paused.

If the novel was about true events - how had they
known about Nicole, without any cameras having
seen it?

"Judge Adams?"

"Yes, Judge Verrens?" Adams asked.

"Judge, if there were no cameras on the boat,
and this novel is non-fictional -"

"Well, I didn't really say the novel is
non-fictional, or even say that it was based
on true events.  I did say, that you could say
it was based on true events, but really, the
truth of these events is a bit hazy, as you
should recognize from the lack of cameras."

"Ah," said Verrens, "I see, Judge."

"Do you?  Good," said Adams.  He smiled.
"In any case, suffice it to say that nothing
illegal was involved in the writing of this
novel.  Rather, I wish you to focus on the
moral dilemmas that the protagonist is facing.
What exactly are they, at this point?"

Verrens considered for a while, skimming
through the earlier pages before he had
inserted his finger.

"Well, there's the obvious one asked of her -
the method by which to select one of their
number to kick off the boat.  The fact that
she is being asked to make a Judgment, even
though she is not yet a Judge -"

"That one is trivially dismissable, I would
say, Judge?" said Adams, interrupting Verrens.

"True," Verrens said.  "She has the training,
and the confidence in her skill to act as a
full Judge, despite not having taken the
test yet.  As I was about to mention, anyway.
Not really a moral dilemma, then, although I
included it for completeness.  She can indeed
act as a full Judge - awareness of one's
knowledge and level of skill is a requirement
in our vocation.  And the final dilemma -"

Adams looked at him expectantly.

"The lack of peer oversight," Verrens said,
"set against the necessity of providing
Judgment, in a condition where such Judgment is
likely to be necessary, and likely to be a
matter of life and death."

Adams continued to look at him expectantly.

"I'm sorry, Judge, those are all the dilemmas
I can see right now," Verrens said.

Adams nodded.  "Judge, both you and Nicole
Angel failed to see another moral dilemma,
at this point."  He paused.  "She did not
consider investigating for herself whether
what the Engineer told her was true, versus
her personal embarrasment, should it indeed
turn out to be true.  A common logical
failing that afflicts even the best of us,
and as I recall, three of my successful
Formal Challenges."

Verrens considered this.  "But Judge, the
exposition of the Engineer -"

"- was not sufficient evidence of its truth
in this case, even as an expert statement.
The veracity of the matter can be checked
explicitly and does not require an export's
exposition.  Of course, I must admit that it
would be so, in a typical novel; a writer
preserves detail, so as not to overburden
the reader with possible red herrings.  But
in the world, the real
world, a Judge in such a position must
demand the investigation; must at least do
so as background to his or her task."

Verrens nodded.  "And if this is, as you say,
true in a way - then perhaps that is a true
moral failing of Nicole Angel."

"One she would do well to protect herself
against, in her future career.  Of course,
the novel has yet to reveal whether that will
happen, or even possible to happen, or -"


Chapter 6

Nicole watched as the Engineer - now known as
Julia Montega - called the others - Raphael
Yu the accountant, Ekaterina "Katja" Ivanova
the Medic, and Michael Thompson the Executor -
to a meeting in order for her to pass
Judgment.

"The standard solution to this," Nicole said
once Julia had explained their problem, "is
to draw lots.  A random choice, which
distributes the penalty across all of us."

"How about -" Michael started, then swallowed
to wet his throat.  "How about I just swim
off?  I'm the one who got added here... it's
not fair to the rest of you..."

"I'm the Judge," Nicole said.  "That's my
Judgment."

"And you are not likely to survive long
without the boat," Katja said.  "Unless we
all manage to get rescued in an hour or
so.  Even though the waters are relatively
warm - we're probably in tropical waters -
treading the water will exhaust you."  She
paused.  "You do have a life vest, but
another night of exposure may be too much.
So, let me revise my earlier estimate.
Unless we manage to get rescued before
nightfall, you yourself must be replaced
in the water."

"Yes," Julia the Engineer said, "we can't
really afford to lose any of us here.
We're all useful.  Oh.  I'm sorry, I
shouldn't have said that."  She was
looking at Raphael the accountant.  "I'm
a demisavant, I'm no good at social
relationships..." She trailed off.

Nicole was stunned into silence.  Trust a
demisavant to see that as obvious, and then
blow it by making the faux pas of saying it
as if it were obvious.

A Medic was most obviously useful in their
situation.  An Engineer would likely be
useful, to figure out how to make simple
machinery, fix whatever complex machines
they might have access to, to help them
and the Medic in her work.  A demisavant
at that; more useful at simple non-social
problems (which more likely to occur
here, there were only five of them) than
complex social exchanges.  A Judge to
consider policy decisions, an Executor to
enforce them - what indeed could Raphael
offer them?

Nicole shuddered.

It was precisely this that the community
of Judges was for.

No one could be left behind, not even in
the name of "the greater good."

No matter how "useless" someone might
appear to be.  Civilization would not
allow it.

And in practice, in a complex scientific
civilization, no one was really useless...

A person's vocation only indicated his or
her main interest, decided at a time in their
life when he or she was just barely mature.
Side interests were sometimes much more
powerfully attractive to a person, after a
while.

And those side interests could spell the
difference between life and death.
Civilization's commitment to helping
everyone was based on that observation -
that an eager amateur hero already on-site
could do as well as, or even better, than a
bored expert who arrived too late to do
anything.  Eleven billion individuals on
Earth, and the billion or so on the Lagrange
points of various other planets in the solar
system, and the half billion on Mars, depended
too much on complex machinery - physical
machinery, as well as social machinery such as
democracy, sousveillance, markets, disputation
arenas, the Judgment System, peer review.
Complex machines that some individuals found
obsessively compelling to study in an amateur
fashion.

And without the community of Judges looking
perenially over your shoulder, it was all too
easy to forget that.  All too tempting to
follow older rules etched into the brain by
long millenia of humans living in much more
primitive societies.


Chapter 7

"So," said Verrens, "she pronounces a formal
Judgment."

"Wait a moment," said Adams, "I'm not there yet."
He read for a short while.  "Yes, a standard
solution to a standard moral problem.  The aside
about modern Human civilization is good, and
explains well the rationale for our system."

Verrens nodded, then, "I somewhat expected her
first Judgment would be more, I don't know,
maybe more flashy, not just some standard
solution."  He paused.  "Although I admit that I
feel relieved that this was her first Judgment.
I hope my first Judgment would be as simple
and straightforward as that."

"I agree," said Adams.  "Simplicity, as the
Scientists continually say, is the core of
scientific beauty.  A common mistake that the
Reporters commit; they like scientific
controversies too much, thinking that
controversy is of interest, and simple,
straightforward, and classic solutions are
boring."  He smiled.  "I'll give you a hint,
if you're shooting for high rank: look for
Judges who are too concerned with what the
Reporters say; they often commit the mistake
of thinking that exceptions to the standard
solutions should occur more often than
'almost never'.  Simplicity is the core of
moral beauty, too.  Of course, as simple as
possible, but no simpler...."

Adams closed his eyes for a moment.  "As to
amateurs - well, I am an amateur Sensei,
and an amateur Scientist; they go well
together.  Rationality is guided by science,
and science is driven by rationality.  The
world still moves; boats, like the one our
heroes are in, still displace an amount of
water whose weight equals their own weight;
Newton's laws are still accurate, to the
extent that General Relativity predicts
them to be accurate.  Non-controversial
issues that I find of great interest and
satisfaction, as an amateur."

Nobody said anything for a moment.

Adams opened his eyes and said, "As to the
novel as written - Judge, have you considered
if the fallacy of legalism applies to its
expression of morality?"

Verrens considered this.  "I did not, Judge.
However, I don't think the charge of legalism
applies.  The fallacy of legalism is the
assumption that law defines morality, rather
than the Central Dogma that morality defines
law.  Our civilization's standard solutions to
problems are not law per se, not even unwritten
laws, as classically cultural customs have been.
The standard solutions are principles that many of
our predecessors have evaluated, over and over,
and in the absence of strong evidence to the
contrary, can generally be safely considered as
correct.  Democracy may not work for a populace
kept ignorant by its media, but beyond that known
failure mode, and others I don't remember out of
hand, democracy works."

Adams smiled, and said, "Shall we continue?"


Chapter 8

Julia found a medical kit stashed away in some
recess of the lifeboat; aside from the standard
first aid equipment, there was a somewhat large
bottle of sunblock which Katja insisted everyone
apply a fixed amount of, in specific locations
of their body.  She then poured a measured
amount of shark repellent into the ocean; Nicole
noted that it was really a combined
shark-and-jellyfish repellent, which made sense.

There were some energy bars, which Katja
declared she would ration out each morning until
rescue; everyone had one for breakfast.

Julia rooted around the raft for a moment,
mumbling something about trying to build a roof
when asked, but eventually just sat, looking
dissatisfied.  Katja recommended that everyone
rest, offering some low-grade tranquilizer pills
from the medical kit; no one took up her offer,
so after taking an expert look over each of them
for serious injuries, and bandaging a scratch on
Raphael's upper arm, Katja popped one of the
pills herself and was soon dozing lightly,
unconcerned and relaxed, on her face a small
smile.

After a while, Julia sat herself comfortably,
her face near Michael's, engaged in a whispered
conversation; Nicole felt a pang of jealousy,
but shrugged it off.  Julia had pulled Michael
in, anyway; perhaps it was appropriate to give
her first chance at him....

Raphael was looking out over the sea; he
seemed sad, Nicole noted.

Demisavants - in earlier ages known as "shy,
but bright", or High IQ Attention Deficit
Disorder, or Asperger's Savant Syndrome - were
now trained, as early as they could be
identified, to explicitly handle social
interaction, and encourage it as one of their
inevitable hobbies.  Many became obessively
brilliant Sociology Scientists as a result of
that training.  Still, the failure of the
built-in cognitive empathy cores in their
brains sometimes showed; Nicole was looking at
one result.  Julia was avoiding looking at
Raphael, a classic case of an intact affective
empathy showing to a demisavant, too late,
what her impaired cognitive empathy could not
earlier predict; an old, reliable sign of
demisavanthood.

At least demisavants could operate well in
modern society, with training.  The opposite
psychosis - antisocial personality disorder,
with an intact cognitive empathy but impaired
affective empathy - was still dangerous.

Nicole said to Raphael -

- was about to speak to Raphael -

Raphael jumped into the ocean, and began swimming
away!

Some well-trained part of Nicole took over.

"Executor!  I am Judge Nicole Angel!  Formally,
I ask you to pursue and subdue that individual!"

Michael pushed himself away from the boat;
Raphael had jumped off the side opposite to him.
Julia covered her mouth in pain; some swift
movement of Michael's had hit her accidentally.
He swam around the boat, then started in pursuit
of Raphael.

Raphael was a surprisingly strong swimmer, even
with a lifevest encumbering him.  Michael could
barely keep up; after a minute or so, he paused
to pull off his own lifevest and redoubled his
efforts.

They were almost distant specks when Michael
finally reached Raphael.  Perhaps a minute had
passed; they were strong swimmers.

"Engineer.  Julia.  I am the Judge.  Can we
navigate the boat towards them?"  Michael did
not appear to be heading back; perhaps all his
effort was in subduing Raphael.

"Not very effectively, Judge.  The boat is round,
not a very hydrodynamic shape.  We don't have
paddles.  A lifeboat isn't exactly meant for
travel..." Julia paused.  "Take off your
lifevests.  Their backs are relatively flat and
stiff.  Not the best paddles, but better than
hands."

The three women paddled with their improvised
paddles.  After a while, Katja gave up trying to
use her lifevest as a paddle; the lifevest
floated and couldn't cut water very well, so she
used her hands instead.  Julia and Nicole
persevered; Nicole could feel her hands grow raw
where the lifevest chafed, as she fought to push
it under the water, to use it as a larger paddle
than her hands.

Perhaps an hour or more later they were near
enough for Katja to pull the two towards them.
Michael had his arms wrapped around Raphael.
Both were panting deeply, Raphael still
struggling.

All of them were exhausted, so they just pulled
the two men close to their boat, all three of
them holding the pair.  They waited, catching
their breath.

Michael spoke first, a melodious but
authoritative voice.  "Madam Judge, " he said,
"as per your formal request, I have apprehended
a certain Raphael Yu.  I formally ask proof of
vocation as Judge, and formal reason for
pursuit and apprehension."  He chuckled.
"Okay, that's probably not something I'll get
right now."

The three women laughed a little.  Julia said,
"Ah, and now you have to formally date me, you
stole my first kiss!"  Julia spoke giddily.
"And I didn't even get the honor of kissing
by mouth as a first kiss.  All I got was the
back of your hand!  Give back the kiss you
stole from me!"  She laughed heartily.

The rest were nonplussed for a moment.  Katja
looked at Julia, then at Michael, who appeared
both puzzled and mortified.  Then Katja
started laughing too, which made Nicole and
even Michael laugh.  Demisavant, indeed.

Then Julia said, "Although somewhat more
seriously, Judge, what do we do about Raphael?
We lost a lifevest, although we do have one
spare here," indicating the stash from which
the medical kit had been.

Nicole stared at her.

Raphael had defied a decision that they had all
agreed to be bound to.  A precommitment to a
method, specified by a Judge.  The timing to be
determined by an Engineer's expert decision on
the continued seaworthiness of their craft.
Both had been defied, without starting a
disputation arena in which a precommitment
could be modified, if new evidence showed that
the agreed-upon precommitment would be
irrational.

A punishment was necessary, but -


Chapter 9

Verrens waited as Judge David Adams finished
reading the chapter.

"A punishment," said Adams at last, "so soon.
Would you agree to this, Judge Verrens?"

"Yes," Verrens said without hesitation, "As the
novel implies that they had all precommitted to
the method and timing.  As a social species
Humanity must punish non-cooperation.  Of course,
the precommitment was not explicitly shown, but
it would be disingenious of the author to expect
the reader to assume otherwise."

"True," said Adams.  He looked at Verrens
expectantly.

Verrens considered for a moment.  "Akrasia, the
state of acting against one's better judgment. I
wonder if this is what caused non-cooperation
from Raphael?"

"Probably not," answered Adams.  "Strictly
speaking, akrasia can only occur due to the
overutilization of a human being's limited
willpower.  If you've already done a good deed,
then you are likely not to do a good deed
again within a short period of time, as
experimenters in the early twenty-first century
found.  It is even worse if it is a deed that
appears good, but is inefficient and does not
actually end up giving actual benefit to
anyone; then, a person's willpower is consumed
needlessly with no lasting effect.  Many
messages circulated back then, asking readers
to pass them on, so that people would know
about evil events occurring; but such messages
actually prevented people from doing any real
good, other than to pass them on.  The end effect
was letting those evils continue.  The wider they
spread, the greater the harm they did; hence
their widespread illegality in our enlightened
era.  For Raphael to suffer akrasia, he must
have done some earlier good that sapped his
will -"

"Precisely, Lord Judge," said Verrens.  "He was
insulted by Julia; inadvertently, as she is
characterized as being a demisavant, but the
event still occurred.  A classic case of a noisy
prisoner's dilemma.  He had overlooked that
insult -"

"- and considered it a good deed, which sapped
his willpower, setting him up for
non-cooperation later.  Or in this chapter,
rather.  Why, that is a good insight, Judge.
I would have said that Raphael was never
portrayed as doing any good deed; as not
having done any deed, as yet."

"Thank you, Judge."

Adams continued.  "So far, the women have
been more proactive than the men; Julia is
currently the motivating driver of Nicole,
who is an active protaganist that has made a
Judgment that binds the precommitment of her
microcosmic society.  Katja has shown
expertise in her vocation.  In contrast the
men have been passive, before Raphael's
non-cooperation, with Raphael a patient under
Katja's care."

Adams paused.  "Well, as a Judge myself I
would say that Raphael deserves punishment,
but -"


Chapter 10

- was punishment feasible?

Nicole had to think about it.  Hard.

Raphael could not be left in the water, as he
would be in a better position to attempt a
foolhardy self-sacrifice again.  Restraining
him was taking all of Michael's strength,
although -

"If the Executor lets you go," Nicole said to
Raphael, "will you act as a sane and
cooperative human?"

"Yes," Raphael said.

Nicole nodded.  "You may release him,
Executor.  Thank you, Michael."

Could social constraint - shame,
essentially - bind him strongly enough that
physical restraints would be unnecessary?
Nicole hoped so; she didn't want any of their
physical materials used to build some sort of
physical restraint, or take up too much of
Julia's time and attention.  By the same
token, she didn't want Michael spending all
his time guarding Raphael.

Well, assuming shame would keep him
restrained - what punishment could Nicole
impose on Raphael?

Wait - how did Nicole know what she knew?

She had been running on instinct - on an
automated System 1 process that had reacted
and judged.  Now she engaged her deliberative
System 2, to work over the decision of her
trained System 1; a microcosm of the community
of Judges, one brain system overseeing the
decisions of another.

Was punishment appropriate in this case?  Had
her instinct failed her?

Consider the consequences.  Punishment of the
non-cooperator would require significant
resources of their little group; at the very
least, it would require Nicole's willpower
to find some punishment that would fit their
constrained resources, which could risk
akrasia in the near term for her.

Non-punishment of the non-cooperator would
signal the de facto repudiation of their
precommitment, without even any disputation
arena to contest it.  It would undermine the
authority of the Judge to pass Judgment over
the moral decisions in their community.

She was a Judge; but duty did not - or rather,
should not - factor into her decision.
Deontology - the ethical theory that right was
what was defined as a person's obligations -
was considered, by a majority faction of
Judges, a failed model for morality.
Pragmatic consequentialism - the ethical
theory that the consequences of actions, based
on a precommitted set of values, subject to
scientific research, determined what was
right - was, for all its flaws and
limitations, considered by the majority of
Judges as the best ethical theory; a way to
keep growing less and less wrong, but
(possibly) never completely right.

Would it be right to punish Raphael?

How could they trust him again, if he was not
punished?  At least punishment would, in the
minds of the members of their tiny community,
balance the books and allow them to treat
Raphael as an equal once more, when his
punishment was served.  It would deter
everyone from performing similar, possibly
wasteful acts of "heroism" and self-serving
"self-sacrifice".  At least, that was what it
should be, if all of them had at least basic
rationality training.

How could they trust him again, if he was
punished?  A person marked as "non-cooperator"
may have that mark almost permanently against
him or her, in the community; it would stymie
his or her future attempts at cooperation.
That could happen, especially in a stressful
situation, where rationality training could
fail, where the built-in animal instincts
stood closer than ever.

Nicole kept thinking, aware that everyone on
the boat was waiting for her decision.

"Give me three minutes to think," Nicole said.
"Engineer.  Julia, I assume you have a timer
of some sort?"

"Yes, Judge Nicole Angel," Julia said,
indicating her wristwatch.  She set an alarm.

The time was on -


Chapter 11

"Ah," Adams said at last, upon finishing the
chapter, "luminosity.  The act of reflecting,
explicitly, one's attention upon one's own
thought processes, investigating whether they
should be changed."  He looked at Verrens
expectantly.

Verrens was trained in the basic rationality
training required of all citizens, and in the
intermediate rationality training required of
all Judge trainees; he could not remember a
topic called 'luminosity' -

"You don't know?" said Adams.  "Well, I've
been advocating its movement into the
intermediate stages of rationality training,
once I learned about it in my amateur Sensei
rationality studies.  At least for Judges.
Perhaps Nicole is being portrayed as being
amateur Sensei.  Or it could be an impulsive
luminosity, not a deliberately decided one.
Don't worry, your lack of knowledge of
luminosity is not a point against you; it's
not yet a standard topic for the rationality
dojos at the intermediate levels that Judges
are required to take.  Although in any case,
some rationality Senseis claim that
luminosity should be derivable by any
sufficiently bright rationalityka; a view
I don't agree with."

Adams continued.  "These rationality
senseis claim that dual process theory
makes luminosity obvious.  That the
deliberative System 2 processes are quite
capable of shining brightly on the automated
System 1 processes.  Thus, luminosity.  But
the full luminosity topic is not just about
System 2 investigating System 1, but also
System 2 investigating itself."

Verrens could only nod, taking in the
lecture.

"But enough of that," said Adams finally.
"What do you think about punishing Raphael,
now?"

"Well, Judge," said Verrens, "I'm not so
certain about it now, now that I've
thought more deeply about their situation
and their current lack of resources to
effectively punish Raphael, the current
stresses in their situation, et cetera.
Perhaps I should also ask the same boon
Nicole asked for - three minutes to think."

They both chuckled at this.

"Well, Judge Verrens," said Adams, "my
experience still says that Raphael should
be punished, and that punishment is in fact
feasible.  Although it does require a more
complex scheme for punishment, which Nicole
must spend her attention for.  In real life,
she could probably afford to spend that
attention, although the situation in this
novel suggests that she must ration this
resource.  In any case, I'll grant you your
three minutes -"


Chapter 12

Nicole spent the first of her three minutes
explicitly assigning whole numbers -
utilons - to the expected utility of the
outcomes.

The utilon technique was a rationality
technique by which a person attempted to
extract his or her preferences - the
utility function - and then use his or her
trained mathematics skills rather than the
less precise built-in brain circuitry.

In this technique, one assigns an arbitrary
number to a particular outcome, then
compared other outcomes and gave various
scores to each outcome, depending on
whether the outcomes were judged to be
better or worse than the base outcome.  It
was a refinement of an older technique,
where a person might list his or her
options, and put the pros and cons of each
option, weigh each of them (or essentially,
assign utilon scores, positive for pros,
negative for cons), and then come up with a
decision.

With training and practice - which Nicole
had much of - the decision-making process
could be made speedily, without the crutch
of pencil and paper.

First arbitrarily assign 10 to the outcome
that the community's trust of their shared
precommitment would be preserved; this
would be a +10 for the punishment option.
Maintenance of her authority as Judge was a
minor positive for punishment, so give that
+2 (punishment 12, non-punishment 0).  The
resources required for punishment were
an issue almost as important as the
community's trust in precommitment, and
probably a bit more in their situation, so
let's call that even and give it a +10 on
par with the basis, score for
non-punishment (punishment 12,
non-punishment 10).

Assuming a continued maintenance of
sanity, the trust of their tiny community
of Raphael would be returned upon
punishment.  Assuming the community as a
whole had a score of 10 - after all, this
was what she had assigned as the score
for the community's trust and its shared
resources - then a fifth of their
community, Raphael, would be +2.  So give
the returned trust after punishment a
score of +2 in favor of punishment
(punishment 14, non-punishment 10).

As for deterrence - assume that the
punishment would deter one other member
of their community from needlessly
sacrificing himself or herself.  So that
would be another +2 in favor of
punishment (punishment 16, non-punishment
10).

Suppose that punishment irretrivably
marked Raphael as "non-cooperator" in the
minds of the community members.  Again,
give that the individual member score of
+2, this time for non-punishment
(punishment 16, non-punishment 12).

Punishment it was.

Nicole then allocated the next minute for
considering what punishment to apply.

The punishment should, as much as possible,
cover the important requirements:
(a) deterrence, (b) rehabilitation,
(c) incapacitation, (d) retribution.  Also,
it would have to be as low in the cost to
the community as possible, so call that
the (e) cost requirement.

Before making a decision, the first step
was to explore the options available.

According to rationality Senseis, one common
failure in rationality was to select,
consciously or unconsciously, some option
too early; this unnecessarily overprivileged
that option, biasing it as the de facto
status quo that needed to be unseated before
another option could take its place.
Instead, the Senseis thought, a person or
group trying to make a decision should
generate as many options as possible, and
avoid precommitting to any option.  Once a
set of options had been selected, only then
should they be evaluated; finally, one
could be selected.

Nicole spent five seconds with her eyes
shut, clearing her thoughts of possible
options that might have infected her brain
before they could properly be captured,
restrained, and evaluated.

Then she opened her eyes, to see what options
she had -

(1) she could give Raphael a stern warning,
(2) she could ask Julia to jury-rig some
kind of restraint, (3) she could ask
Michael to always keep an eye on Raphael,
(4) she could limit Raphael's right to
engage in community benefits for a limited
time period, (5) she could obligate Raphael
to pay for community costs, also for a
limited time period.

Now she considered her requirements.  The
most important was the cost to their tiny
five-person community who, for the moment,
owned a boat, and such materials that Julia
might find or scavenge from it, as communal
property; give the (e) cost requirement a
base utilon score of 50.  Both
(a) deterrence and (c) incapacitation would
reasonably be considered equal to each
other in importance, she thought, and each
individually was perhaps almost, but not
quite, as important as the cost
requirement; give them a base utilon score
of 40 each.  For the (b) rehabilitation
requirement, perhaps it could be
considered less immediately vital, at
least given their limited situation; give
that a base utilon score of 30.  For
(d) retribution, give that a base score of
10.

For the option (1) warning, it could be a
reasonable, but not perfect, deterrence,
so give that perhaps 30.  It might be a
good rehabilitation, so maybe 25 (total
55).  A good warning might prevent
Raphael from trying something similarly
foolhardy in the future, but not very
well; give that incapacitation score
only 20 (total 75).  It may satisfy the
needs of retribution quite well, so give
it the full score (total 85).  And of
course it was cost-free, so give the
full 50 for cost (total 135).

- and so on she thought.

Option (4) won - prevent Raphael from
enjoying community benefits for a time.

And for the final minute -

How to implement this choice.

What benefits could the community have?
Nicole was now on a roadblock.  Their only
benefit was being relatively drier inside
the boat.  But to have Raphael replace
Michael's position hanging on outside the
boat would totally eliminate the
incapacitation score; being outside the
boat meant that Raphael could more
easily swim off.  Especially now, Raphael
knew that Michael could only beat him if
Raphael had an encumbering lifevest and
Michael did not; the next time, Raphael
may very well make good by taking off
his own lifevest before attempting to
swim off.

No, wait, there was another benefit that
the community could engage in.

Human beings had a desire to give to other
people in their community.  Now that
Nicole had thought about it, it was in
fact a highly appropriate punishment.
Raphael had attempted to sacrifice his own
life in order to give to others in the
community, in direct contravention to the
agreed precommitment that such a sacrifice
would be done by lots.

Raphael would be disallowed and exempted
from sacrificing himself, for a period of
time.  This evening, whoever might be
selected to replace Michael in the water,
it would most definitely not be him.


Chapter 13

Judge David Adams was chuckling as he finished
reading the chapter.

Verrens smiled.  "Three minutes, Judge Adams?"

"Many things to chuckle about," Adams said.
"As you mentioned, three minutes.  It took you
as long merely to make certain that punishment
was appropriate in this case.  Although it
would be unfair to compare your performance to
Nicole's, I think; that would be the fallacy of
generalization from fictional evidence.  Nicole
does not exist, although as I mentioned before,
the novel does have a kernel of truth to it -
it is not truly perfectly fictional.  And
further, I myself was able to ascertain that
punishment was necessary, in far less time than
three minutes, for that matter.  So, on
reflection, perhaps it would indeed be fair to
compare your performance to Nicole's; you can
think faster than you did."

Verrens bowed his head in assent, accepting his
superior's rebuke.

"Also," said Adams, "I was amused to see that
Nicole was able to derive a punishment that I
myself would have passed in this case."

"For what it's worth, Judge," answered Verrens,
"I did think of such a punishment, but I had
not made a complete analysis yet.  So I didn't
present my thoughts.  A poor excuse, of course;
I shall try to think faster in the future."  He
paused.  "Aside from the obvious exposition in
this chapter on how to make a difficult
decision, I also think that this chapter
showcases how to actually change one's mind -"

"- the third thing to chuckle about in this
chapter," said Adams.  "Your thought is
correct; please continue."

"- although it does not actually show a change
of mind.  The process was indeed the full
process, and the fact that the same conclusion
was derived - that Nicole did not actually
change her mind about imposing punishment - is
largely immaterial.  The process of changing
her mind started in the previous chapter:
Nicole actually stopped.  Then - clear your
mind.  Hold off on proposed solutions: first,
think of the problem, then propose solutions
once the problem and its issuess have been
considered.  First Nicole thought of the
various issues involved, and the different
parameters that her decision had to fulfill;
she attempted to not propose any actual
concrete course of action.  Only then did she
generate her options.  And during the process
of selecting among her options, she used a
system that could, in fact, allow her to go
either way: a utilon scoring system.  It is a
good example of avoiding the error of
privileging a hypothesis."

"A complete analysis," said Adams.  "I applaud
your thoughts over this aspect of the story so
far.  Now let us discuss Raphael's punishment.
Could Raphael have attempted to manipulate
Judge Nicole into selecting this particular
punishment, specifically to save himself?"

"I don't think -" started Verrens.

Then he stopped.

Adams watched the wall clock, allowing Verrens
time to think.

A few seconds before the time that Adams had
allotted, Verrens said -


Chapter 14

"In order for that to be true," Nicole
explained to Julia, "we would have to assume
that Raphael knew, for a fact, that (1) I
would order the Executor to pursue him,
(2) that the Executor would successfully
catch him, and (3) that this was the
punishment I would give him, rather than, for
example, just giving him a stern warning.
While the actual decisions were rational, he
could not be perfectly certain that I would
be rational enough to make those decisions,
and that Michael would be rational enough to
make a fast decision under pressure on
whether or not to follow my formal order.
Further, he had no evidence that Michael
would be able to pursue him.  We saw
first-hand the evidence that Raphael is a
good enough swimmer to elude capture from
Michael, and it was only the fact that
Michael removed his lifevest that allowed
our Executor to catch Raphael."

Nicole paused for breath.

After passing Judgment and describing the
punishment to be meted on Raphael, Julia had
objected, pointing out the possibility that
Raphael's real goal had been to be
specifically exempted from participating in
the drawing of lots in case they had to
reduce their number.

Nicole had asked for another three minutes to
think.  And after three minutes she gave her
true analysis of the situation.

Julia seemed unsatisfied, but the rest appeared
to accept it.

Then Raphael spoke -

"Judge," he said, "I ask you, formally, for a
Judgment."

"What is it?" Nicole asked.

Raphael paused for a moment.  "Earlier, Julia
Montego implied that I was useless to our
community.  This insult hurt me and was what
lead to the current situation.  In such a
case, should not Julia be punished too?"

Nicole paused.

The standard explanation accepted by most Judges
and taught to trainees filled her mind.

But she had to be careful in how to express the
argument.

In the late twentieth century, and even up to the
early twenty-first, when mass interconnected
communications became publicly available to a
growing percentage of citizens, arguments over
difference in opinion flooded the channels, in
large-scale events called "flames".

The main problem was that the people who had
trained themselves to query nature and learn the
texture of its internal organization had
developed a different method of communicating,
compared to the people who trained themselves in
actually convincing others.

The former, who were more likely to be correct,
could only scream in frustration at the latter,
who were more likely to spread their model of
reality.

The secularization, decentralization, and
equalization of society had almost failed to
occur at all.

Fortunately, the Scientists who studied nature
were ultimately correct.  As their study of
nature spread, they eventually found evidence
to support their most basic assumption - that
human behavior was, at its source, a completely
natural and material phenomenon.

And they re-discovered the techniques that
their Reporter counterparts had been using all
along.

"Raphael," Nicole said, "I understand your
sentiment -"

"No!" interrupted Julia.  "I'm a demisavant.
It wasn't my fault!  I don't do well at social
relationships!  It was an error that I could
have prevented, I'm trained to pause and think
to keep my condition from over, over, I don't
remember, but I'm extremely stressed..." She
broke down in tears.

"Julia, Raphael," Nicole said, keeping her
voice level, "I understand both your
positions."  She breathed deeply, a technique
that would also encouraged her listeners to
imitate her; a good deep breath was a common
trigger for rationality techniques, and she
hoped that it would bring some sense into
the stressed 40% of her community.

"Next time, I'll try to do better in my
Judgment," she said.  Triggering the empathy
of those who were irrational was more likely
to allow you to lead them back towards some
semblance of sanity.  "It was my Judge
training.  That was what my Judge training
did.  Next time I'll make it up to the both
of you, okay?"

The Dark Arts.  That was the term that the
first Scientists re-discovering these
techniques used.

The name reeked of opprobium.  It was
intended to do so; some exceedingly wise
student of science had thought it
appropriate to use one of the techniques
itself as a method of discouraging the
techniques as a whole.

But a rationalist was not allowed to
reject the use of a tool, just because of its
label...

"But please consider," Nicole continued.
"In civilization, in Humanity's cities and
colonies, people using my Judge training
keep peace and order.  I'm not saying that
my Judgment training is perfect or the
ultimate in truth, or better than your
past and your experiences.  I'm only
saying that it's more useful for us all
now.  That it helps us all keep our
sanity and our safety, together."  She
smiled at them.  "We want to be sane and
safe together, right?"  Focus on what you
shared with the people you were trying to
convince.  Eventually, people will follow
what you do, especially if you stopped
talking about it and just did it.  Herding
worked, even among humans.

"Now, Julia," she said, "I want you to
apologize to Raphael.  Okay?"  She smiled.

Julia bowed her head.  "I'm sorry, Raphael.
I see you're a good swimmer.  Maybe, maybe
I think it will be useful.  We're in the
ocean, after all.  So, so, I'm sorry."
She looked at Raphael directly, and said,
"If I fall into the ocean, save me, okay?
I can't swim."

Raphael said, "I'm sorry, too.  You're
right, Judge.  It's not fair of me to blame
Julia.  I'll take my punishment."  He
looked at all of them.  "I'll follow the
community's precommitment."

Nicole breathed a sigh of relief.  The
danger was passed.

Back when twentieth century science was still
discovering the material workings of the human
brain, humanity's primitive justice systems
began to allow a highly peculiar defense:
not guilty by reason of insanity.

Because certain behaviors could be tracked to
particular reasons - so it was argued then -
the behaviors were not, in fact, the fault of
the individuals who actually engaged in that
behavior.  They could not be responsible for
those behaviors, and thus it would be
unreasonable to punish them.

But as the number of anti-social behaviors
were traced to their causes, the acceptance
of that defense became exceedingly strained.
Crimes that in previous eras would be
clearly considered as the fault of their
perpetrators were being solved, not by
punishment, but by halfhearted attempts at
"rehabilitation".  More and more, it seemed
that the study of human behavior would
utterly destroy the foundations of morality
and society.

Some even advocated suppressing the
information and research about the material
mechanism underlying human behavior, so that
human beings could pretend to control their
own destiny, and still be "responsible" for
their choices.

Free will, previously an idle speculation
indulged in by well-fed philosophers, became
an important policy issue.

Science could not be allowed to destroy
free will.

But finally a revolution occurred, led by
Neurological Scientists.

Punishment, it was determined, was itself
one of the causes of human behavior.
Further, it was a soical policy that could
be controlled independently of human
behavior, and thus not be causally
entangled with other effects on human
behavior.

If a particular personality type, or a
particular psychosis, was studied and
determined to not respond well to punishment
as a motivator for better behavior, only
then could punishment be foregone, in the
interest of reducing the cost of
imprisonment and other punitive costs.

But such individuals could not be considered
as full citizens.

Full citizens were controlled by the threat
of punishment from society.  Raphael's denying
responsibility for his actions and thus
exempting himself from culpability for his
punishment, was tantamount to repudiating his
status as full citizen.

Punishment was justified in the typical case
where the threat of punishment could be
reasonably expected to actually deter the
anti-social behavior, by scientific studies
of existing data collated from governments
implementing various policies.  And since a
vast majority of humanity were demonstrably
more likely to avoid anti-social behavior
if such anti-social behavior would lead to
punishment, then the issue of the
"responsibility" of their choices was
considered moot.  Free will returned to
being a pastime of philosophers.  The Judges
rejected the doctrine of innocence by
reason of insanity.

"Come on," said Nicole, "Julia, give the
spare lifevest to Michael.  Then let's
pull in Raphael.  We're all in this
together, everyone.  Ready?"


Chapter 15

As Adams finished reading the last page of the
chapter, Verrens said, "A well-filled chapter,
don't you agree, Judge?"

"Yes," said Adams.  "I find it quite
fascinating that you and Nicole agree quite
closely in your conclusions.  Although I admit
that my question regarding the possibility of
Raphael manipulating our main character was
largely an idle one."

"Really, Judge?" said Verrens.  "I had thought
it was an attempt at testing whether I would
indeed follow-through on my informally stated
commitment to improve the speed of my
thinking."

"There is that," said Adams.  "I truly did
want to check that, and could think only of
my idle thought.  Still, I must congratulate
you this time; you were able to beat Nicole
this time by a full minute.  In any case, can
you think of anything more we can talk about
for this chapter?"

Verrens thought for a while.  "None, Judge,"
he said.  "I cannot think of anything to
disagree about or highlight in this chapter's
exposition of our history and our current
theory of punishment."

"How about its explanation and demonstration
of a Dark Art?" asked Adams.

Verrens shrugged.  "There are Dark Arts and
then there are Dark Arts.  The very label
itself is an application of a Dark
technique; by giving a negative label to the
set of techniques, we seek to discourage
their use and possible misuse."

Verrens paused, pensively, then continued,
"You mentioned earlier, Judge, that this
novel was being proposed as a possible
training material for student Judges.  If
so, then the demonstration of a legitimate
use of a Dark Art would be useful in
guiding future Judges in determining what
would be acceptable situations for using
Dark Arts, as well as showing which Dark
Arts could be more safely used."

"I see," said Adams.  "Well, that is
feedback that we might give to its author,
so that the author will know what to focus
on in teaching the next generation of
Judges.  Thank you for this opinion, Judge
Emmanuel Verrens.  Let us continue."


Chapter 16

After pulling in Raphael, the group settled back
again.  Katja dropped another dose of the
shark-and-jellyfish repellent, citing the fact
that they had probably moved beyond the edge of
its rated effectiveness.

"Julia," said Katja, "can you set an alarm at
mid-afternoon?  That's probably the best time
to swap in Michael for whoever gets off the
boat next, so his clothes can get dry before
nightfall."

"Okay," said Julia.  She manipulated her
timepiece.

"And you can all feel free to douse your head
in the water at noon," said Katja.  "Or at any
time.  Or better just keep your heads wet.  I
don't want heatstroke on any of you.  Before we
throw in the next person into the water, we all
put on a fresh coat of sunblock.  And forget
lunch, those bars should keep you alive for
twelve hours."

Nicole settled back to rest, noticed that
Michael swam to a position next to Julia, and
decided to just close her eyes and doze off -

- was about to close her eyes when her averted
gaze settled on Raphael's bandage.

"Katja," she said, "should we replace Raphael's
bandage?"

Katja, who had already closed her eyes and
covered them with her arm, simply said, "Let
him worry about it himself, I'm not wasting more
of my bandages on that self-serving jerk -"

And Nicole almost wanted to scream at that point,
her indignation white-hot, System 1 triggering on a
very important moral violation...

Fundamental attribution error, it had been called
when it was first discovered.

Suppose you were to observe another person kicking a
vending machine at a point in time A.  At a later
time B, in a situation with that person and another
vending machine, was the probability that that
person would kick the vending machine higher than
50%, or lesser?

Most people - at least most people back then,
before basic rationality training was mandatory -
would say that the probability was higher than 50%.
They attributed the action observed at point A to
be due to a fundamental property of the person, and
used that single behavior to predict that person's
behavior at a later point in time.

Suppose instead that you were to observe yourself
kicking a vending machine at a point in time A.  At
a later time B, in a situation with yourself and
another vending machine, was the probability that
you would kick that vending machine higher than 50%,
or lesser?

And there, such as it was, was the kicker.

People saw a single memorable action from a particular
individual, and assumed that the action would define
that individual's personality.  And yet a moment of
self-reflection on their part would have revealed the
utterly laughable stupidity of that error.

Never mind that the Medics had some sort of oath to
serve all individuals medically, regardless of the
situation (or so Nicole knew vaguely as part of
civilized culture); never mind that Medic Ekaterina
Ivanova had violated that oath (as Nicole understood it,
anyway).

Medic Ekaterina Ivanova had violated something dearer
and nearer to Nicole's vocation.  Katja had decided to
punish Raphael.  Without a Judge's explicit expert
Judgment.

On reflection, Nicole realized, medical treatment was
one of the few benefits their community could offer,
and was one benefit that they could have withdrawn from
Raphael as punishment.

But that was as unthinkable for a civilized person as
killing Raphael and using his skin as a roof to protect
them from the sun would be.  Humanity assumed it as a
right to protect, to be withdrawn only with reluctance
and the direst of needs.

What kind of person was Katja?  Did she really have
everyone's interest to heart?  Was she hoarding the
energy bars to herself?

Could she have somehow cheated on the basic rationality
training?  Medics did not need the intermediate course
and perhaps some rich parent had decided to have Katja
skip the entirety of rationality training.

Perhaps it would be wiser to consider Katja as completely
irrational.  After all, she had not learned to detect and
fix the fundamental attribution error that came built-in
with her brain.

Wait - that was the fundamental attribution error working
even on her!

The core mistake of fundamental attribution was the
tendency to assume that mistakes could only be committed
by incarnations of pure evil.

But bogeymen did not exist in reality.  There was no
incarnation of pure evil, no category of existing sapient
beings fundamentally composed only of irrationality.

Katja was a human being.  Nicole could assume this with
significantly high prior probability greater than 99%.
In addition, she was very likely a modern Human Full
Citizen; again, Nicole could assume this with
significantly high prior probability (space travel was
disallowed for non-Full Citizens; most non-Full Citizens
were kept in asylums where Medics and Neurology
Scientists did their best to cure them of their disease;
and so on).

This meant that it was also quite likely that Katja had
been given at least the minimum basic rationality
training that was a requirement to be declared a Full
Citizen.

The erroneous conclusion of fundamental attribution was
due to not properly considering the effects of situation
on an individual's behavior.

Nicole consciously observed the situation that Katja was
in.

In broad strokes, it was basically the same situation
that had caused Raphael - who was himself a modern Human
Full Citizen, and therefore also trained in at least the
minimum basic rationality training required for such a
position - to act irrationally and repudiate their
communal precommitment, causing him to believe that a
senseless self-sacrifice, triggered by an unintended
insult from a demisavant who was in essentially the same
situation, would be a good deed.

The problem was not that they all fundamentally had the
attribute "irrational".  The problem was that the stress
of being in a lifeboat on an unknown sea, with no real
knowledge of when they could be rescued, had overpowered
their trained rationality responses.

Their animal nature, refined and developed by millions of
years of evolution, had taken over the domain of their
brains.  Animal natures fighting against rationality
techniques that, for all their sophistication and for all
the thought and development that had been put into them,
had existed for no more than a couple of hundred years,
and were mostly developed in an environment of reasonably
peaceful civilization.

When their situation put them in an extremely primitive
environment that their evolved primitive simian brains
had recognized, their built-in circuits had simply put
themselves in control.

And the final step...

Nicole was a human being.  She herself could assume this
with significantly high prior probability greater than 99%.
She was herself a modern Human Full Citizen, and had been
given the same basic rationality training (and of course
the intermediate rationality training required of Judges).

She could very well make that same mistake, in the same
situation.

All right, she told herself.

First, fix the hopefully-temporary irrationality in
Katja's brain.

Second, fix their situation so that irrationalities were
a much less likely occurrence.

Attack the problems one at a time.  Divide the problems
into smaller parts, and attack the sub-problems one at a
time.  Keep doing this until a sub-problem is trivial.

Nicole started to think on how to improve the
irrationality in Katja's brain...


Chapter 17

"I fear I must protest, Lord Judge," said Verrens, "the
pacing of this novel.  The design of its plot is..."
He glanced at the stack of papers which were the chapters
they had already completed.  "Well, it is almost a quarter
of the way through.  And it is not yet noontime of the
first day of the novel!  Surely it does not seek to simply
describe just a single day of the protagonist's life?"

"Well," said Adams, "it is after all first and foremost
proposed as training material for student Judges.  But in
the interest of improving it, would you care to give a
diagnosis of its faults?"

Verrens considered for a while.  "For one, I get this
feeling that the characters other than the main are
placed simply to be problems for the main character.
Although on reflection, it is probably something that I
might accuse myself of fundamental attribution."

Adams chuckled.  "Well, thank you for your opinion," he
said.  "Although I have heard it expressed that all human
fictional stories have an aspect of fundamental
attribution.  It is all too easy to simply label one side
as good and the other evil."

Adams continued.  "I once read of an author," he said,
"who said that the species name of 'homo sapiens' was
a too-blatantly self-aggrandizing name for our species.
He said that if we were honest, we would instead call
ourselves 'pan narrans'.  Not the 'wise man', but instead
the 'storytelling ape'.  I think it fits the description
of humanity, at least before the advent of widespread
rationality.  And one of our fundamental characteristics
as storytelling apes is our desire to always consider
having two sides to a story, and to consider one side
the heroes and the other the villains."  He paused.  "I
think that if we were to make an honest piece of fiction
about reality - a true rationality fiction - then it
would not be about heroes against villains.  Instead, it
would at its core be about many different human beings
against the inner impulses that make them, well, less
than human."

"And I suppose," said Verrens, "that this novel seeks to
be one of this kind?"

"Yes," said Adams.  "I can tell you quite well that the
designer of this novel's plot structure had good reason
for having the moral and rational decisions follow each
other so closely in this manner, in a situation where
rationality and morality are strained.  It is needed as a
test of rationality and morality, two things that we as
Judges must live by."

They were silent.  Then, Adams spoke -

"Tell me, Judge," he said, "how would you solve Nicole's
first problem?  Let us consider this before you turn to
the next chapter; you should have sufficient training to
consider this already -"


Chapter 18

Nicole had a diagnosis (of which she was extremely sure)
on what was currently Katja's problem: fundamental
attribution error.  Now she only needed to figure out how
to stop it.

First, Nicole decided, she needed to have more
insight on why Katja had decided to claim that
Raphael was irrational.  What would cause Katja
to effectively say that Raphael was insane?

Secondly, Nicole would have to determine what to
do based on what she learned from Katja's
thought processes.  She would have to precommit
to that; she could not allow herself to be
suddenly stymied by something that she had not
considered.

So, split the second sub-problem.  First, how
could Katja respond?

The most likely case would be that Katja had
committed the error of fundamental attribution.
Then the proper response to that would be to
guide Katja back to rationality: remind Katja of
the map-territory distinction; have Katja
explicitly consider the possibility that her map
was wrong; and then support Katja in correcting
her map.

A less likely one was that Katja already knew
Raphael beforehand, and that this was not an
isolated incident that was more likely caused by
situation rather than personality.  Just because
both were strangers to Nicole did not mean that
they were strangers to each other.  In such a
case, Nicole decided, she would have to inform
the others, and revise her previous knowledge
regarding Raphael's expected future rationality.

For even less likely possibilities that Nicole
could not imagine right now, she would ask for
further advice from the other members of the
community, and very likely ask for more time in
order to think.

Satisfied that she now had a reasonable plan,
Nicole started -

"Katja," she said, "why do you think that
Raphael is a jerk?"  Trivial problem, trivial
solution.

Katja didn't even bother to uncover her eyes to
answer.  "Isn't it obvious?" she said.

"No," Nicole said, as flatly as possible.
"Please explain."  Please don't stop being a
trivial problem.

Katja finally uncovered her eyes then, and said,
"Well, mister heroic I'll-sacrifice-myself-for-
the-good-of-the-tribe here made us throw away a
lifevest.  Now we have no spare lifevest.  He
wasted the efforts of all of us getting him back.
Energy and effort that we were better off
preserving, this ocean is tropical and who knows
when the next major storm will strike?  And now
the bandage is ruined, it's water resistant but
it's not water proof, it wasn't designed to take
on both a lot of water and strenuous movement
that keeps rubbing on it."  She paused, then:
"See?  It's obvious!  You're not a Judge yet, a
real Judge would have just let him swim off
instead of going all 'Executor, I am Judge' to
chase after him!"

Ignore insult.  Prey has noticed you.  Lead off
to direction of trap.  "Ah," Nicole said, "so
on the basis of this data, you conclude that
Raphael is an irrational jerk?"

"Quite right I do!" Katja said.

"So you believe this new data falsifies the
reasonable assumption that Raphael is just an
ordinary Citizen with basic rationality
training?"  Nicole said.  Jump over trap.
Wait for prey to pounce and fall.

"Yes!" Katja said.  "It's as plain as Science.
Take a hypothesis and test it, and if it's
falsified, throw it away!"

Prey in trap.  Let trap close.  "Good," said
Nicole.  "Then I, Nicole Angel, of vocation
Judge, solemnly proclaim: I defy the data."  And
then move in for the kill -

In the middle of the twenty-first century, when
"Science" was still "science" without the
capital letter, and the old habits of
hierarchical thought were dying but not yet
dead within civilized society, someone had to
invent the practice of proclaiming: "I defy the
data".

Experimental results falsified accepted theories
all the time.  And some of the old proponents of
pre-rational hierarchical thought learned enough
of Science to be annoyances, but not enough to
be useful members of a Scientific secular
civilization.

Whenever a pre-rational idol was in danger of
being destroyed by the truth wielded by Science,
its protectors scoured the journals far and wide
for any data - any experiment - that would
falsify the truth.

And since even the best Scientists were - and
continue to be - merely advanced simian
descendants, why, certainly any sufficiently
motivated search would come up with some
experimental result from lazy, corrupt, or
just plain erroneous Scientists.  Some result
that the protectors hoped would destroy the
truth.

Hence, the development of "I defy the data."

"Sure," said the prototypical Scientist who had
invented that phrase.  "This experimental data
you show me would destroy the theory.  I won't
dismiss your data out of hand.  But I defy the
data.  Here, have my head, I'll put it on the
guillotine for you (metaphorically, of course):
show me more data.  Show me new experimental
results, more than this one you have on offer.
Replicate the experiment, or else.  If you
can't, then I hold that this was a fluke, a bit
of noise, static from our noisy universe.  Then
I get to keep my head, and more importantly, my
theory.  But if you can replicate this result,
then by golly let my head be cut clean off (or,
in less graphic language, let me withdraw my
theory): that which can be destroyed by the
truth should be!  I, a scientist, solemnly
proclaim: I defy the data!"

And that simple proclamation (the exact theory
and the exact experimental results was just out at
the edge of Nicole's memory; she was contemplating
being an amateur Historian as well, but in any
case, it was that proclamation which had stuck in
her mind, and it was that proclamation which was
in these days now as much a part of modern cultural
consciousness as Hamlet, Tom Sawyer, and Fate/Stay
Night) had reverberated throughout the Scientist
community.  It became a habit, then a tradition;
finally, a codified law that was taught not only to
Scientists, but to all Free Citizens.

A great Scientist who proclaimed "I defy the data"
would, indirectly, drive the grants of several
experimenters very high indeed.  And a few great
Scientists did lose their heads, metaphorically,
when the data truly went against them.

No longer could the pre-rationalist protectors use
the language of Science to cut its own tendons.

And because of the terms of the wager implied by
the words "I defy the data" - why, the
pre-rationalists could not use it to defend their
idols.  For every defiance cost you the possibility
of losing your head, metaphorically.  Those four
words became the shield that was also the sword -

- Katja was taken aback.  "W-Wait," she stammered,
"that doesn't, it's not, it's not applicable
here -"

"It is," said Nicole, "or otherwise you cannot say
'take a hypothesis and test it'."

Katja stopped.

Remind her of rationality.  "The map is not the
territory," Nicole said, "and single actions do not
define a person.  You saw a tree, assumed a forest,
and filled your map of Raphael with it."

Katja remained silent, eyes blank.  Nicole hoped it
was a rationality trance.

Have her consider that her map could be wrong.
"Yes," Nicole said, "Raphael might be an
inconsiderate, irrational jerk who will consistently
sacrifice the community's values for his own.  But
Raphael might also be an ordinary Full Citizen whose
basic rationality training was overrun, temporarily,
because of the extreme stresses of our current
situation.  So your map might be wrong.  We need
more data for better consideration."  Have her
explicitly mention that possibility.  "Do you
agree?"

"Yes," said Katja.  "I'm sorry."

Now support her in correcting her map.  "So let's
give Raphael another chance, all right?"  Nicole
said.  "Let's see if he tries to repudiate the
community's precommitment again, before we
actually write indelibly in our map, 'Raphael is
a jerk'."

First problem solved.

"Okay," said Nicole.  "Now, can we get this
bandage replaced?"

"No," said Katja, "and this time it's not because
he's a jerk.  We need to preserve our supply of
bandages."

"Impossible!" said Raphael.  "What kind of great
incompetence - I would expect that an emergency
medical kit would have good margins for extras."

"Yes, but Julia says -" said Katja.  Then, "Well,
Julia?  Shouldn't you be the one to tell them?"

"What's this?" asked Michael.  "What's happening,
Julia?  Something wrong with the boat?  Other
than a slow leak?"

Julia was shaking her head.

"Oh, blast it," said Katja.  "Haven't any of you
wondered why we're the only lifeboat around?
The planetary drop pod fits how many, 60 or so?
Where's everyone else?  Julia thinks it's
sabotage.  Engineer's expert opinion.  Why else
would an otherwise-safe planetary drop pod fail?
And if this boat is the only one that got away -
well, it would be highly plausible that it got
away because the saboteur specifically chose
this boat as an escape vehicle, right?  So: one
of us here is the saboteur.  I wonder who?"


Chapter 19

"Whoa," said Verrens as he finished the chapter.

"What is it, Judge?" said Adams.

"Nothing, Judge," said Verrens quickly.

"Judge Emmanuel Verrens," said Adams, "as you know,
the most important part of any secret is the fact
that the secret exists.  You have already revealed
the existence of the secret, and from the context
of your revelation I conclude the secret is some
sufficiently interesting plot twist revealed at the
end of this chapter.  Suffice it to say that you
have already spoiled the ending of the chapter, and
the details themselves are now secondary."  He
sighed audibly.  "I shall be quite frustrated if
the plot twist is not sufficiently interesting
after all, since you have already raised my
expectations of it."  He turned back to his copy of
the manuscript.

A few minutes of reading, and then: "Huh."

Adams put down his copy.  "Well," he said, "the
plot advances.  Although I honestly cannot say that
I am inordinately surprised; I have read various
permutations on this kind of novel before, and I
know the designer of the plot.  It would be
necessary, she would say, for this plot twist to
occur here, and just so; needed to maintain the
interest and focus of the Judge trainee.  So
perhaps I need not fault you too much; you need
not be disappointed in my less-than-amazed
reaction at the turnings of this novel's plot."
He smiled.

Verrens thought for a moment.  "Who do you think
the saboteur is?" he said.

"We have no real evidence yet," said Adams.  "It
would be premature to say anything.  It would even
be premature to accept immediately the claim that
there is indeed a saboteur; it needs more thought
on whether it is true, or a flawed conception of
reality.  Better to hear the full analysis
directly from Engineer Julia Montego.  Still,
one might consider this possible; but also, one
must consider first whether it is more likely that
a truly random accident occurred, rather than
deliberate sabotage.  Modern Humanity can claim to
be less wrong than pre-rational humanity; it
cannot claim to be perfect."

"Yes," said Verrens, "but surely a novel is
written about unlikely events; precisely why we
have an injunction against generalizing from
fictional examples."

"A typical novel, yes," said Adams.  "But this is
not a typical novel.  The plot of the novel might
be considered fictional, perhaps, but not the
knowledge, and most certainly not the decisions
made, especially by the main character.  Those,
as I mentioned before, might be considered to be
true, in a way."

"Ah," said Verrens, "I understand."

"Thus," said Adams, "in considering this novel, we
would do best to first keep an open mind; the
probability of sabotage is extremely low, and I
can assure you that the designer of the plot knew
that.  We know that there is some issue whose
knowledge it would be important to know about;
but we also know that we lack crucial evidence to
distinguish between a universe where
exists-saboteur is true, from a universe where
not-exists-saboteur is true.  Better to look with
fresh eyes and see the evidence.  With that, I
think it best for us to proceed."


Chapter 20

Confusion might have engulfed her.  Terror might have
overtaken her.  They were there, at the edge of
rationality; she was not specifically trained to handle
that, especially terror, as those were not expected to
occur often in her chosen vocation.  Still, even basic
rationality techniques were general enough to at least
serve as speedbumps against confusion and terror.

"I don't know," Julia was saying, "I'm not sure..."

Katja was still berating Julia, insisting that she
tell everyone her expert opinion.  Michael was speaking
more soothingly, but what he was saying pretty much the
same thing that Katja was.

The problem with "I don't know" was that it gave too
little information to another rational Human being.

Consider one person, known to be a perfectly trustworthy
perfect observer, visiting another person in a sealed
room.  The first tells the second that outside there is
an apple tree - a true statement, since the person is
perfectly trustworthy and a perfect observer - and
challenges the second person to give his knowledge on
the number of apples on the apple tree.

The second person might reasonably say "I don't know,"
but this was too little information to extract from the
given knowledge - the existence of the apple tree.

A better rationalist would, more reasonably, say, "I
don't know exactly, but I'd assume it to be between 0
apples and 1,000 apples."

Obviously, no known apple tree can carry, say, a
million apples, much less a billion apples.  But a plain
"I don't know" did not capture that knowledge that the
second person already possessed.

Between someone saying "I don't know where the keys
are," and someone saying, "I don't know where the keys
are, but I last saw them on the dining table," one
could say that the second had given more information.
And yet both could legitimately say "I don't know."

Knowledge was not a binary condition; when you zoomed in
on the details, the lines and edges of "known-to-be-true"
and "not-known" were actually probability distributions.
A rationalist might not bet even odds that the apple tree
in question had fewer than 10 apples, but he or she might
accept a bet at a hundred to one against.

And if Julia had some evidence which increased the
probability of sabotage above the base probability of
'almost never', meaning some value infinitesimally lower
than 0.01% (given the ubiquity of cameras, the larger
reported incidences of accidents versus incidences of
deliberate sabotage in the recent years, and so on), then
not sharing that evidence would be equivalent to
misrepresenting the level of danger they were in.  No
matter that she did not know for certain: they were all
rational, thinking sapient beings.  They had the minimum
rationality training required of Full Citizens.

So: how to extract that evidence from a demisavant?

- "Excuse me, may I speak?" someone said.

It was Raphael.  Good, at least now he was engaging with
the rest of the community.

Then Nicole realized that if Raphael truly felt like an
integrated member of their tiny community, he probably
wouldn't be asking permission to speak.

Katja glared momentarily at Raphael, then blinked and
put her face into a more neutral expression; at least she
remembered that she had precommitted to giving Raphael a
chance to prove at least basic rationality.  Michael
stopped speaking, and Julia stopped shaking her head and
repeating "I don't know" over and over.

There was silence.

Raphael still didn't speak.  Break the ice, then.
"Okay," said Nicole, "please speak, Raphael."

Raphael licked his lips, then said, "My current
registered vocation is accountant, but some time ago I
started to dabble into Administration.  My company sent
me to Earth for formal Administrator training, so I
suppose you could say that they found it more efficient
to retrain my hobby rather than hire a registered
expert."  He paused, looked at Nicole, and said,
"Nicole isn't a full Judge yet, but we call her Judge
provisionally now because she has the most knowledge of
that field, and relative to the rest of us she is an
expert.  So, may I at least claim to be Administrator
in our community?"

Nicole nodded.  The others seemed less certain, so she
said, "Yes, Administrator."  She smiled.

"Of course," Raphael said, "an Administrator handling a
tiny group is not very efficient, so I'm still not
really all that useful.  However, at least let me point
out that we might do better to use some form of
disputation arena while deciding on whether or not we
are at increased risk because of the existence of a
saboteur among us."

"Well," said Katja, "how can we hold a disputation
arena in this kind of situation?  An Arty-Delphi is
impossible without a central server, and a Deepy market
needs a backing monetary institution, unless Julia can
rig a bank and an economy out of metal and rubber."

"There are older forms of disputation arenas," said
Raphael, "which are much lower tech than a Real Time
Delphi Method or a Decision/Prediction Market.  We can
use a modified form of Nominal Group Technique."

"Okay," said Michael, "what's that involve?  I've never
heard of it."

"It's a very simple disputation arena," said Raphael.
"Less flexible than any of the Delphi methods, and does
not integrate anonymous information at all, unlike most
Delphi methods which can integrate minor anonymous
information and the prediction markets which are almost
completely about anonymous information.  However it is
simple, low tech, relatively fast, and engenders better
feelings of -"

"Administrator," said Nicole, "the method, please?"

"Sorry," Raphael said.  "First, we introduce the
problem to be considered.  I think Katja's introduction
of this issue can serve well enough.  Then, each of us
thinks, without discussing with anyone else, for a short
time - perhaps fifteen minutes will be enough, in order
for each of us to review as much information as we can
remember of the crash last night.  Ideally, we'd write
our own notes, but we lack even pen and paper -"

"Wait!" said Julia.  "I have paper.  And a pen.  I'm an
Engineer, of course I'll have paper and pen!"

"Do you have enough paper and pens for all of us?" said
Raphael.

"No," said Julia, "only one pen, unfortunately.  Spares
were in the bag, which didn't survive, I suppose.  I do
have a small notepad.  It's not even damp!"

"That's fine," said Raphael, "you can be the
facilitator later.  Anyway, after the fifteen minutes of
thinking are up, each of us presents what we thought
about during the fifteen minutes, one at a time.  I
suppose I can start the ball rolling, and the next
speaker will be the one to the left of the previous
speaker.  Now the important bit: during the initial
presentation of thoughts, the only questions allowed are
questions of clarification, regarding exactly what is
meant.  No challenges, no counterproposals while someone
else is speaking.  During this initial presentation, the
facilitator jots down notes about what each person said.
The main ideas taken by the facilitator from the initial
presentation should really be visible to everyone, but I
suppose Julia can show her notepad to everyone easily.
Any questions yet?"

There were no questions, and then Katja said, "Is that
all?"

"No," said Raphael, "after all members have given the
initial presentation of ideas, we then try to merge
similar ideas.  At this stage we have counterproposals
and syntheses of ideas.  Then each of us ranks the
ideas, and then we have a consensus."

"I'm not an Administrator," said Michael, "but is that
really a disputation arena?"

"Yes," said Nicole, before Raphael could answer.  "The
requirements of a disputation arena are: the
centrifugal phase, where each individual can first
decide on their own ideas independently of other
individuals; and the centripetal phase, where the
ideas are put in competition against other ideas - the
actual arena.  It's better to have this loop
repeatedly, and better to do it in real time, which is
why Arty-Delphis and Deepy markets are the preferred
ones, but - yes, what Raphael described is a valid
disputation arena!"

Nicole noted that Raphel looked a lot more pleased
and a lot more effectively a valued community member
now.

"Correct," said Raphael.  "Disputation arenas require
the centrifugal phase in order to foster independent
thought, as otherwise group attempts at aggregating
information become subject to groupthink.  As we all
know, groupthink effectively reverses the smart mob
effect; the desire to conform prevents mistakes from
being pointed out, and as each new member joins the
group, the effect is magnified, increasing the social
pressure to conform and further preventing any member
from attempting to defect from the accepted,
erroneous consensus.  End effect: groups in
groupthink situations become subject to information
cascades that mean that each new member decreases
effective rationality, rather than -"

"Administrator!" someone said.  At this point, it
wouldn't have mattered who did.


Chapter 21

"Character development, Judge," said Verrens, when
he saw Adams put down his copy of the chapter.

"Yes," said Adams, "and if I think I know the
designer of the novel's plot, well, this is simply a
set up for another moral decision soon.  Although
she has been quite imaginative about such twists
recently, and I would rather enjoy what it might end
up being, rather than speculating about what it might
be."  He smiled - no, he grinned - and said, "So I
will quite legitimately say 'I don't know', as I
prefer to squeeze a bit of fun out of this situation
and watch you speculate on what it might be."

Verrens sighed in response.  "A secret whose
existence is known," he said, "and thus may very well
haunt me, at least for the next few chapters, until
it is revealed.  And I suppose you will obstinately
say 'I don't know' quite unhelpfully, while you
enjoy your more accurate speculations, due to the
greater knowledge you have that you will not share
with me."

Adams laughed.  "All right, then," he said, "I will
give you my own speculations, but only regarding the
topic of sabotage.  Regarding the moral decision
that I suspect will occur soon, you are on your own.
In our modern world, provable sabotage occurs once
for perhaps every ten thousand accidents; assume
that the true incidence of sabotage is an order of
magnitude higher than the ability to show evidence
of sabotage - somewhat unlikely, as this means the
ubiquitous cameras are not that useful and are
probably a waste of energy maintaining.  But even
so the base probability of sabotage is only about
one out of a thousand."

Adams cleared his throat.  "Now, suppose that our
characters reveal additional information.  In
order to be on par with the case of accidents,
that information would have to move up the
probability by three orders of magnitude.  So, I
might bet on sabotage if I would win ten credits
for, say, one credit loss if I'm wrong, but for
an even bet I'll bet on an accident."

Verrens sat silently, considering.  "Your
analysis seems reasonable, Lord Judge," he said.
"However, I'm not certain if you've factored in
the growing tide of Technological Renouncers.
There is now a growing number of radical members
of such groups.  Using a similar analysis as yours,
I would bet at a rate of five is to one against."

Adams frowned.  "Is that true?" he said.  "Ah,
never mind; my dislike of the Reporter vocation has
just asked for its cost.  Well, then, I should
probably update my own estimates, in light of your
information.  Thank you for showing me an error in
my map."

"You're welcome, Judge," Verrens said.


Chapter 22

Julia's timer chimed the end of the agreed-upon
fifteen minute thinking time, and Raphael spoke.

"Okay, I'll start," he said.  "Last night, as is
usual for planetary drops, we were given sedatives
in order to relax us during the actual drop; in
addition, the given sedatives were intended to
synchronize our bodily circadian rhythm to the
local time of our drop area.  If the accident
hadn't occurred, we would be in a much larger
boat; basically the drop pod would be the boat
itself, and we would be towed by the ships
waiting to bring us into port.  So three things
come to mind at this point."  He held up three
fingers.

"One is that," Raphael said, ticking off the
numbers, "we are probably reasonably close to the
time zone of our original targeted drop area - we
all awoke at about local sunrise, so our circadian
rhythms are close to the local time.  Although
that may not be saying much - a time zone is a
rather large section of the Earth, and we might
have landed a good distance north or south of our
expected drop area.  Second, I would expect that
currently, a lot of ships - both sea and air -
will be searching for any survivors.  However, if
our planetary drop pod crashed a large distance
from here, then searchers are likely to start at
the crash site, and search in widening circles
around it for drop lifeboats like this one.  So
we may indeed have to wait quite a while before
rescue."

Then Raphael looked at Michael.  "Which brings me
to the third thing, which is quite more
interesting.  From what Julia said, last night
she pulled in Michael close to the boat.  Now,
we don't see any other lifeboats nearby, and
there would be somewhere between fifteen to
twenty of those, each capable of carrying
four people.  It's not possible to land from
space without a vehicle with full drop
capability, so Michael's original drop lifeboat
landed within swimming distance of ours, and
then had problems, not during the drop itself,
where any problem is likely to be fatal, but
rather upon -"

"Hey!" said Michael, "let me give my story
first before you -"

"Point of order," said Nicole, "but I believe
the rules we precommitted to require that only
one person can speak at this stage, except for
questions of clarification."

"But he's trying to build a case that I'm the
saboteur!" said Michael.

"I'm not," said Raphael, "and you can give a
full rebuttal of my points during your turn.
Which is the point of this stage, anyway.  We
want to encourage people to fully share all
the relevant knowledge they have; thus,
anything that could discourage them from
sharing is disallowed until the next stage."
He smiled sheepishly, mostly at herself,
Nicole realized.  "Thank you, Judge.  As
Administrator I should have been the one to
actually raise the point of order.  I guess I
don't have the actual skills yet, just the
knowledge from my reading about
Administration."

"You're welcome," said Nicole.  "Michael,
you'll get your turn later.  Please
continue, Raphael."

A part of Nicole sank a little as Michael
glared at her momentarily, but some things
were more important than -

"Where was I?" said Raphael.  "Ah, yes, the
other lifeboats.  Now, if the drop lifeboats
dropped near each other, then we would expect
either to see other lifeboats, or at least
their debris - lifeboat parts, dead bodies.
But I think that would also mean that the
lifeboats themselves would also land
relatively near the final crash site of the
pod, which would mean that we should be
expecting searchers to find us early.  It's
been what, eight hours, maybe more?  Given
current technology, that's a long time.
Unless, that is, there are other factors
slowing them down, such as sheer distance,
or - deliberate slowing down by a larger
organization than just a single saboteur or
group of saboteurs on-board the pod."

Raphael dropped his voice, obviously for full
effect.  "Which, in fact," he said, "makes
Michael's being here very cogent.  If
Michael's lifeboat was indeed nearby
'naturally', meaning that we can expect the
other lifeboats to be nearby also, meaning
that the delayed rescue is because of an even
larger organization preventing proper search.
The fact that we see no other lifeboats may
mean that the other lifeboats were never
successfully ejected from the failing pod -
and our survival here could also mean that
this lifeboat was specifically chosen as the
saboteur's escape."

He continued.  "But if Michael's lifeboat was
a fluke, and just happened to be nearer to our
position than on average, then we can relax -
we haven't been rescued simply because of the
huge distances involved."  He paused,
apparently thinking.  "That's all I thought
about."

"Is it my turn?" said Nicole.

"Wait," said Julia.  "So, major ideas: we're
in the same, or near the same, time zone as
our original drop; we expect many searchers;
we expect searchers to start near the actual
crash zone; Michael got here, which suggests
that sabotage occurred -"

"Uhm," said Raphael, "that's not quite what I
meant.  My main idea is that there are two
possibilities: lifeboats landed near each
other, which suggests that the lifeboats are
near the crash site, which suggests that,
since we haven't been found yet, something
else is preventing the searchers from
searching effectively.  The other possibility
is that the lifeboats landed far from each
other, which suggests that the lifeboats are
also far from the crash site, and the reason
why rescue is taking so long is because of
the sheer distance.  Michael being here
suggests the 'near' condition, but the fact
that we can see no other evidence for other
lifeboats suggests the 'far' condition."

"So how do I write that down in the notes?"
said Julia.

"Okay," said Raphael, "write that
'lifeboats near' implies 'lifeboats near
crash site' implies 'slow rescue is due to
external factors, probably sabotage'.  Then
write a separate bullet point saying
'lifeboats far' implies 'lifeboats far
from crash site' implies 'slow rescue is
due simply to distance'.  Then write
'Michael is here' implies 'lifeboats near'
condition, and then write the separate
'no visible lifeboats' implies 'lifeboats
far'."

When Julia had written that down, Nicole
said, "My turn?"

"Yes," said Raphael.

"Okay," said Nicole, "I actually thought of the
sedatives given to us before the drop, too.
And those sedatives got me thinking about just
how extensively the saboteur or saboteurs have
to operate."  She paused.

"The main reason that sabotage is unlikely,"
said Nicole, "is the ubiquituous cameras, which
also exist in the cabin, control bridge, and
other areas of the drop pod, as per the
international Sousveillance Law.  The cameras
can be viewed by anyone, as per Sousveillance, 
but I do remember one detail of the pre-drop
safety presentation.  During the actual drop,
at some stage in the drop, the cameras would
not be able to transmit to the general public
due to the presence of heavily ionized plasma
that would form under the pod, or something
like that."

She breathed in, and said, "So: during the
drop, most of the passengers will be under
sedation, and I expect the crew would focus
more of their attention in technical matters of
the drop.  Nobody outside the pod can see the
cameras in real-time, and a saboteur might
arrange to have the camera's recordings
get destroyed, or have the pod get destroyed
in a manner that would believably cause the
camera's recordings to be destroyed.  No one
knows of the sabotage, everyone thinks it's
an accident.  A perfect crime."

Then Nicole looked at Raphael.  "Raphael,
however, brought up the possibility that a
larger organization is actually pulling the
strings of the saboteur.  And the main benefit
that an organization might get is to be able
to claim that they managed to actually
sabotage a planetary drop pod.  So secrecy
should not actually be one of the goals.  It
wouldn't be necessary to trigger the sabotage
at a time when secrecy is possible; the
saboteurs only needed to ensure that the
passengers were all sedated so that no heroic
amateur could have stopped them."  She smiled.
"So I suppose that I don't really have any good
idea, and wasted my 15 minutes."

"Oh," said Julia, "so should I strike them
out?"

"No!" said Raphael.  "We need to discuss all
the ideas presented first, before we strike any
of the out; and we cannot discuss until all
members have actually spoken in the first
stage."

"Okay," said Julia.  "So: cameras make sabotage
unlikely; cameras cannot transmit during drop;
saboteur could commit perfect crime during
cameras-off condition; organizatons behind
sabotage might not want perfect crime.  Is that
all, Judge?"

"Yes," said Nicole.  "So who is next?  You or
Michael?  I'm not sure which of you should go
next since both of you are at my left."

"Let me," said Michael.  "Please."

"Okay," said Nicole.  "Your turn."

"First things first," said Michael, "What
happened on my lifeboat was that apparently,
the gas injectors failed.  During re-entry
inside the drop lifeboats, we are protected by
simple air bags that are supposed to fill up
just prior to ejection of the lifeboats.
There were three of us in my lifeboat, but
after my air bags filled, theirs only partly
filled.  And then our lifeboat ejected."

He looked at everyone, particularly hard at
Raphael.  "By the time we splashed down, the
necks - and other parts - of my companions
were broken.  I was lucky; the air bags
protecting me had filled enough to just leave
me bruised.  On splashdown, from what I
observe on your lifeboat, the capsule part is
supposed to open up and the additional air
bladders are supposed to fill up so that the
lifeboat floats."  He paused.  "It didn't
happen on my boat.  I manually opened the
capsule, since the entire lifeboat was
sinking.  I managed to reach the surface,
swam around screaming, until I heard someone
shout back and swam towards the sound.  It
was Julia, of course."

And then -

"But you don't have to believe that," Michael
said.  "The problem we're facing now is that
we are engaged in a game of Paranoid Debate.
We don't know if one of us is a deceiver, and
we don't know which one, if there is indeed
one.  Or maybe more than one, for that
matter.  And I don't think anyone of you has
considered that fact deeply enough..."


Chapter 23

"I vaguely remember, Judge," said Verrens,
"about Paranoid Debate; isn't it a parlor
game of some kind?"

"Yes," said Adams.  "Although it is one that
has been designed specifically as a tool for
teaching rationalists how to detect deception.
Basically, a game master prepares a special
deck of cards, a few of which are red cards
and the rest being black.  The players are
dealt a single card at random, and are
instructed not to reveal it.  Then a question
is asked, usually one with a numerical answer.
The players must then debate and the entire
group should come up with a single consensus
answer."

"Ah, yes," said Verrens.  "Now I remember.
The interesting part of the game isn't the
discussion itself, it's how the individual
players are scored."

"Correct," said Adams.  "Players who were
dealt black cards are scored higher if the
group consensus answer is near the actual
answer.  However, players who were dealt
red cards are scored higher the further
away the group consensus answer is from the
correct answer -"

"- meaning that the players holding red
cards should act as deceivers," said
Verrens.  "But they must also strive not to
be detected; if someone suspects them of
being deceivers, what they say can be
discounted and ignored."

"That is not the only twist," said Adams.
"In the case where more than one red card
is in the deck, then there is the problem
of the deceivers trying to cooperate
without revealing themselves.  Or to make
it clearer: consider a Paranoid Debate
game where multiple deceivers exist.
Focus on one of the deceivers trying to 
twist the consensus away from accuracy.
If another player gives a piece of
evidence that the deceiver knows is likely
to be false, the deceiver cannot know for
certain that the other player is a fellow
deceiver or an honest player who had
incomplete or erroneous information.  If
that player subsequently gives information
whose accuracy the deceiver truly does not
have any knowledge about, the deceiver
cannot simply blindly support the other
player, since that player might not
actually be a fellow deceiver."

"I see," said Verrens.  "So the deceivers
in such a multiple-deceivers game would
also experience some of the uncertainty
that the honest players would feel when
hearing someone else give information that
they know is incorrect - uncertainty over
whether that person is the deceiver or
just an honest player that had an
inaccurate map."

"Hence the allure of the
multiple-deceivers variant," said Adams.
"But that is not all.  The most complex
variant involves not just multiple
deceivers, but adds uncertainty over
the number of deceivers.  The game master
prepares a deck whose total cards
outnumber the number of total game
players by the number of red cards in
the deck.  Thus there is a small
possibility that none of the players
actually hold any of the red cards."

Verrens was silent; his expression
suggested that he was extremely
impressed over the variants of the
game.

"That is the situation, I think," said
Adams, "that our characters now find
themselves in: a Paranoid Debate game
where the number of deceivers itself
is unknown.  And the question of the
game is: how many people are holding
red cards?"

The two Judges considered this for a
while.

"Shall we continue?" said Adams.

"Wait," said Verrens.  "I've thought of
it just now, Lord Judge, but this
discussion of the Paranoid Debate
game makes me more appreciative of
something I once read in a general
Science interest magazine.
Specifically, a theory developed and
studied long ago by the Evolution
Scientists: the Machiavellian
Intelligence Theory."  He paused to
gather this thoughts.  "Of the higher
apes, it seems that only homo sapiens
was able to achieve a runaway
intelligence explosion.  Other similar
apes - pan, gorilla, and pongo - were
not able to achieve the homo level of
intelligence."

"Ah, the Machiavellian Intelligence
Theory," said Adams.  "Or Hypothesis
when I first heard of it.  Homo band in
groups for mutual protection, and in the
modern world, for trade in an era of
specialization.  Within the group,
selection must occur between
individuals, since all members of the
group gain the same group benefits.  And
one mutation in the early homo line
allows some individual to gain an
advantage, not by being stronger or
faster - not by manipulating the
low-order ecological environment - but
by manipulating the higher-order social
environment.  And this eventually lead
to the spread of genes encouraging the
growth of the social cores of the
brain - social cores to not only
manipulate the social environment, but
also to detect attempts at
manipulation.  And it is the more
generalized social cores of the brain
that are the basis of modern humanity's
intelligence."

Verrens chuckled.  "I should have
remembered that you claim to be amateur
Scientist, Lord Judge David Adams," he
said.  "Anyway, manipulation of the
social environment is generally achieved
by deception - or in other words, lying.
This requires a larger brain, one capable
of storing both the true information, and
the invented false one; to be able to
keep track of which is which; and
finally, to extend the false information
when more evidence supporting it is
demanded.  The application of this
theory to our character's situation
means that they - or rather, those who
are honest players in the game - need to
exercise their brains fully to root out
the red cards - if any."

"Yes," said Adams.  He appeared to think
for a moment.  "One of the most powerful
techniques for deception is
self-deception.  Brains are tuned very
well for detecting attempts at deliberate
lie-telling; a consequence of honest
signalling, which prevents too many
successful deceivers from imitating
signals of honesty, which would
deteriorate the signal and cause everyone
else to switch to some other signal for
honesty.  One way of subverting this is
for the brain to actually act as if it
truly believes the lie, to the point that
in all social interactions, the
individual acts as honestly as possible.
But in private, where no one is looking,
the individual - subconsciously, since
even the conscious mind is subverted to
prevent it from spilling the secret -
acts as dishonestly as possible.  Thus
the abstractions of country that an
individual would loudly proclaim their
pride in would suffer from those
individual's private actions, even as
their consciousness congratulated itself
over its patriotism."

"I'm not sure I follow, Lord Judge,"
said Verrens.

"To give a more concrete example," said
Adams, "one of my ancestors grew up in
a country that, at that time, was poor,
had tremendous corruption, and was
under the grip of a powerful
memecomplex.  In his maturity, he went
abroad to work in one of the more
affluent countries of the period - in
fact, my family's home lies within the
geographic borders of his adopted
country, which no longer exists now.
He constantly proclaimed his original
nationality; his internet handles
included his nationality; he socialized
with other people who grew up in the
old country but now lived and worked
in his adopted country; and yet, he
never actually returned to his birth
country."

Adams looked grimly, remembering his
research into his own past.  "He gave
gifts to his relatives, but in terms of
large-scale economics the value of what
he sent back was nowhere near the value
of what was spent on him in order to
raise him up to adulthood.  His
children never truly identified with
his birth country, even though his
primary partner was from the same
birth country.  His grandchildren
never even learned its name.  His
story was not atypical.  When the
Helvetian War started, his birth
country was one of the first whose
financial systems collapsed, due in no
small part to people like him, who
were numerous."

"I see," said Verrens.  "Lord Judge,
your honorable ancestor -"

"- was not honorable," said Adams.
"Although I can forgive him.  His
self-deception blinded him.  Today our
rationality training prevents such
self-deception, which is a good thing.
I'm sorry, please continue."

"Your ancestor, then," said Verrens.
"Your ancestor was not a rationalist, I
suppose, as the Helvetian War was
triggered by the early rise of the
Senseis.  Thank you, Lord Judge; it
serves as a useful concrete example of
self-deception.  His social
interactions showed him as a patriot,
but his actual private actions - the
decision to remain in his adopted
country and raise his children there,
the decision to give only the simplest
social gifts that would not have
significant economic effect to his
birth country - belie his actual
self, which was not patriotic."

"Yes," said Adams.  "A true patriot
would hardly need to proclaim aloud his
or her patriotism, but simply directly
work, for the betterment of his or her
country."

"Judge," said Verrens, "you are amateur
Sensei as well, as you mentioned before.
Rationality training would help against
self-deception, would it not?"

"My young Judge," said Adams,
"self-deception was one of the first
problems that the early Senseis tackled;
they considered it the most important
problem of their time.  I mentioned that
my dishonorable ancestor's birth country
was in the grip of a powerful
memecomplex.  At the time of the rise of
the Senseis, that memecomplex, and many
other very similar ones, were no longer
actually believed by many individuals, but
those memecomplexes acquired, as
protection, powerful component ideas that
were intended to actively trigger
self-deception.  People professed belief
because disbelief was labelled evil, even
though a moment's thought and some research
would have revealed non-evil disbelievers.
Post-modernist ideas were welcomed into the
memecomplexes to prevent Science from
dissecting them, and to prevent rival
memecomplexes from competing against each
other, detrimental against their shared
struggle for survival against the
brightening light of Science.  Today's
surviving memecomplexes are significantly
smaller and much more benign, even
beneficial, than the ones that the early
Senseis had to destroy.  Techniques against
self-deception were some of the earliest
and most powerful weapons developed,
because they were needed in that fight."

"Judge Adams," said Verrens, "could you
tell me more about the rise of the
Senseis?"

"Yes," said Adams, "Let me tell you what
happened -"


Chapter 24

"Question of clarification," said Kate, "I
don't see exactly how the, uh, Notional Group
Technique is like a game of Paranoid Debate.
Can you explain?"

"Nominal Group Technique," Raphael muttered.
"It's not the technique itself that -" he
started to say, and then - "Executor Thompson?
If you please?"

"As Administrator Yu was about to say," said
Michael, "before he remembered the rules he
himself told us, it's not the technique itself
which is the Paranoid Debate game.  It's the
fact that one of us may be a deceiver, and thus
would deliberately try to lower the group's
estimate on the possibility of sabotage."

"And," said Nicole, her mind racing, "even if
none of us is the saboteur, we would -"

"Point of order, Judge Angel," said Raphael -

"We should discuss this, Raphael," said Katja.
"If Michael is correct, then the disputation
arena's decision could be contaminated -"

"Wait, wait," said Julia, "I have to tell you
all first -"

Everybody started talking.

"And if we all discuss this now," said Raphael
imperiously, "then we might as well freaking,
freaking -" his face flushed red as he grew
angry - "we might as well just freaking
brainstorm!"

The rest of their tiny community stammered
into silence, Julia last.

"Yes, I said it!" Raphael shouted at them.
"'Brainstorm', I said!"

"There's no need for that sort of language,
Administrator," said Nicole -

"Yes there is!" said Raphael.  He seemed more
calm now.  "Discussing important matters in an
ad-hoc, high-speed, high-pressure manner was
precisely the original meaning of that word."
He sat straight, leaning forward slightly to
radiate dominance - a move that Nicole
recognized, from part of her own training.  "And
the first Sensei-taught Administrators chose to
make that word into the pejorative term for
forms of discussion that promote groupthink,
reduce effective group rationality, and turn
into large-scale dominance contests rather than
efforts at compromise and truth-finding.  Today
we no longer use the term for its original
meaning, because Administrators simply never
allow discussions to devolve into that kind of
condition.  Only its pejorative meaning
remains."

He look at each of them.

In the early twenty-first century, most
proto-rational groups had a problem with a
particular facet of Humanity's evolved brain:
emotion.

Many thought that rationality required the total
expunging of emotion from all thought.

But the Senseis considered it absurd.  If a
civilization of barbarians were to attack a
civilization of rationalists, the Senseis reasoned,
then if the rationalists lost because their people
could not defeat the raw savage emotional intensity
of the barbarians, they weren't really very
rational after all.

Rationality - instrumental rationality - was for
winning; emotions were a tool that could be wielded
to exert rationally-controlled social force (and,
thereby, could be used to win).  What was needed
was not the extirpation of emotion from rational
life, but control over its expression.

Rationalists should win over barbarians, because
they could control their emotions, whip it to just
the right level of intensity to maximize the
benefits without losing the plusses to the
inevitable drawbacks.

Nicole was impressed; Raphael had used his outburst
almost like a surgically precise scalpel.

Nicole spoke.  "I'm sorry for triggering the
earlier, uh, 'brainstorm', Administrator," she
said.  "I suppose I can understand why the term
was invented."

"Point of order, Judge," said Raphael.  "Not a
question of clarification."  Then he closed his
eyes momentarily.  "Thank you anyway, Judge.  I
suppose your moral expertise suggests that an
apology right now is more important.  Now, can
we return to the discussion, Michael?"

"Not a very good Administrator, are you,
Raphael?" said Michael.

"Michael -" said Julia -

"I'll handle this, Engineer," said Raphael.
"Point of order, Executor, no challenges at this
stage.  Please speak of the ideas you have
regarding the problem at hand: whether a
saboteur is among the members of our community,
how to determine if it is so, and what we can do
about it."

"Well then," said Michael.  "I hold that Raphael
attempting to swim away means that he is the
saboteur."

Many questions and counters to that idea filled
Nicole's mind.  However, she had precommitted to
a method, specified by an Administrator, on how 
to present counter-ideas.  She could understand
now why Raphael had commented that ideally, pen
and paper for all members of the discussion was
really needed.

Wait, asking for clarification was allowed at
this stage according to the rules she had
precommitted to -

"Question of clarification," someone said,
before Nicole could.  It was Raphael.  "Can you
elaborate more on this thought?"

"Certainly, Raphael," said Michael.  "Raphael
swam away, not as a result of being insulted by
Julia, but because he needed to be found by
his organization - whatever it is - for
rescue.  His larger organization, as he himself
said, is slowing down rescue so that he can be
picked up earlier, and possibly so that the rest
of us can be killed too."

Michael said nothing more, so - "Is that all,
Executor?" said Raphael.

"Yes," said Michael.

"Okay," said Julia.  "Michael's reported
observation on his lifeboat: air bags failed,
lifeboat floats failed; we are playing Paranoid
Debate; Raphael swimming away is evidence for
being saboteur."

Julia licked her lips.  "Is it my turn now?" she
said.

"Yes," said Michael, "your turn, Julia.  Can you
handle it?"

"Yes," Julia said.  She breathed in heavily,
eyes shut.  And then -

"I like the Sousveillance Law," she said, eyes
still shut.  "Especially when cameras are
pointed at machines.  Last night, I had my
personal computing device tuned to several
different cameras that were monitoring the
control bridge.  I had my persocom magnify the
image to focus on the gauges and indicators
that the crew was monitoring.  Not really good
enough to see the values on the indicators, but
good enough..."

She opened her eyes, then, "The sedatives don't
work perfectly with me, you see", she said.
"They don't pull me to sleep fast enough before
the drop actually starts, and afterwards, when
the pod is in port, I'm still very groggy and
just half-awake.  So I got only the minimum dose
that the crew would give me, and set up the
persocom in front of me, with the bridge
indicators in view, to help me relax.  It's
happened to me before, so that's what I do to
cope."

She paused.  "Just as I was drifting to sleep,
before the start of the drop," she said, "the
signal from the cameras failed.  That never
happened before.  Like Nicole said, the plasma
ionization during atmospheric re-entry will cut
off the camera's transmission to the general
public, which is something that is unavoidable
and hence exempt from Sousveillance Law, but as
a good-faith guarantee the cameras should still
transmit locally on board the pod itself."

There were nods indicating understanding around
the boat.  Since Julia had somehow suggested the
possibility of sabotage to Katja earlier, her
evidence was very interesting to the rest of the
community.  "That the cameras were shut off was
not a likely event.  I think it suggests
sabotage.  However -" she paused - "one detail
most people are unaware of is that generally,
the cameras transmit all the time, as long as
they have power.  And I have no reason to expect
that the cameras on board the drop pod were an
exception.  This means that it's likely that the
cameras, in a normal drop, would still be
transmitting in real-time to the general public
even during the drop itself; it's just that we
expect the ionization during re-entry to
effectively block the transmission.  If so, then
it might make sense to knock out the
sousveillance cameras."

She looked at all of them.  "I'm an Engineer,
and I am an expert - a fangirl, really - of
applied Science.  One recent demonstration was
a receiver that could pick up and reconstruct
electromagnetic signals transmitted through
shielding.  Since the ionization during
re-entry works similarly to shielding, it
seems likely to me that the saboteurs shut off
the sousveillance cameras just in case a
specialized reconstructing receiver, like in
that demo, could receive the transmitted image.
Defense in depth, as we Engineers would call
it."

She was silent, but still looked as if she had
something to say, so Raphael prompted her. "Is
that all, Engineer Montega?" he said.

"No, no, not at all," she stammered.  "It's
just that what Raphael said earlier reminded
me - the lifeboats are organized by pairs.
And, and - I saw Michael enter the lifeboat
that was paired with ours."  She was blushing
at this point, Nicole noticed, and then Nicole
realized that her own cheeks, and even her
ears, were warm, she hadn't noticed Michael
during the emergency evacuation - anyway (she
forced herself to pay attention), Julia
continued, "The pod has an effectively lower
coefficient of air friction during the drop,
due to its larger mass versus surface area,
than the lifeboats.  The effect is that when
the lifeboats are ejected, the pod would travel
further than the lifeboats, despite inertia and
Newtonian physics.  So we might expect the
lifeboats to be nearby, but the pod itself to
be somewhat further away."

Raphael shrugged ruefully at this.

"A-anyway," Julia said, "I'm not sure, but I
would expect that pairs of lifeboats would be
ejected simultaneously.  So Michael's lifeboat
being nearer than the other lifeboats would be
plausible.  I'm not so certain about how much
distance to the other lifeboats we can expect.
Depending on the timing, we might expect them
to be within swimming distance, or much more
distant."

Julia scribbled in her notepad; then she said,
"I left my persocom behind.  Lots of my
personal work and hobbies in there.  I have
backups but it won't have the ideas I thought of
during the last trip.  And my family will be
worried.  I think there was sabotage, but I'm
not sure.  Not really.  Because a failure at a
critical point can cause cascades of failures.
We design machines with defense in depth -
multiple layers of protection, redundant
systems, etc. - but we know that sometimes, just
sometimes, the universe is out to get at a
machine.  Sometimes the cost to add more
protection just can't be justified.  So the
accountants would say - and they'd be right,
Administrator.  Life is a risk, and we gamble
with it.  Most of the time the gamble pays off.
Sometimes it doesn't.  And I'm babbling, I'm
sorry, so I'll just cut it short and point out
that a strong-enough power surge can shut off
the power supply of the cameras, cause damage to
the pod, and possibly cause various failures in
other equipment - like the lifeboats.  The
source of the power surge can be some natural
fluke, some accident or oversight.  Or it could
be sabotage - a very simple sabotage, at that."

She raised up her notepad, and said, "Main
ideas: Julia's reported observation is that
the cameras stopped transmitting locally inside
the pod before the accident occurred; cameras
shutting down during drop suggests a
well-prepared sabotage; Julia's reported
observation is that the lifeboats are organized
by pairs; Michael's boat and this boat being
near to each other is not likely to be a fluke;
we can naturally expect the lifeboats to be far
from the pod, but near to each other, because of
differences in frictional coefficients due to
differences in size."

Julia sighed loudly.  "That's all I've got.  I'm
really sorry for starting this; right now, I'm
not actually sure there was sabotage at all -"

"It's my turn now?" said Katja.  "Because
personally I think there was indeed sabotage."


Chapter 25

"Katja seems quite insistent," said Verrens, "even though
Julia appears to now express a lower probability for
sabotage than she is implied to have expressed to Katja."

Adams simply nodded.  "Yes," he said, "and, in my
considered opinion, this part of the novel continues to
be a setup for the actual decision that the main character
will have to decide later.  Assuming that my friend the
plot designer continues to prefer the same pattern, that
is.  But as for the decision itself - well, as of now only
the author would be able to speak of the actual decision
that will be taken."

That appeared to be all they would discuss for the chapter,
so after a short while Verrens said, "Shall we continue,
Judge?"

"Wait," said Adams, hand raised.  "An interesting thought
has just occurred to me - if you don't mind a garrulous old
Judge delaying you."

"Please continue, Judge," said Verrens.

"The basic setup of the plot," said Adams, "strikes me as
similar to the style of investigative novels.  In an
investigative novel, after showing a vague, ambiguous view
of some crime - in our case, the falling, malfunctioning
pod - and introducing the main character, the main character
is then somehow forced or hired to investigate who committed
the crime, and for what reason.  Then the potential
perpetrators and witnesses are called upon to present their
evidence - the transcript of the Nominal Group Technique
disputation arena we are reading through, in this case."

Verrens nodded.  "I follow your reasoning, Judge," he said.

"And there I suppose the similarity ends," said Adams.  "In
a classic investigative novel, the main character, and the
main character alone, is largely responsible for most of the
insights that lead to identifying the culprit."

"And," said Verrens, "since you bring it up, I think you thus
suspect that -"

"- in this novel, the main character will not be the only one
to have the necessary insights in identifying the culprit,"
said Adams.  "Yes, that is what I think will happen.  And in
our case, there is also the question of identifying whether or
not an actual crime was committed."

"Even though an ending revealing a non-crime would not help
the flow of the novel itself, being too iconoclastic of the
genre," said Verrens.

"Again, Judge Verrens," said Adams, "remember that this is
first and foremost a novel written about a group of modern
rationalists, a novel striving to be as realistic and true as
possible.  There are no invented Sciences involved, not even
the Sociological or Neurological Sciences - which, as an
amateur Sensei and an amateur Scientist, and as a Full Citizen
with the basic rationality training, and as a Judge with the
intermediate rationality training, I can assure you of.  And
one important aspect of modern rationality is the concept of
'the Craft and the Community'."

Adams shifted in his seat, preparing for another lecture.  "A
rationalist, applying the techniques of rationality as well as
he or she can, will be able to bring to bear a large amount of
brainpower to any problem.  But the central insight that fed
the early rise of the Senseis, as I pointed out to you before,
is that a motivated group of rationalists, as they
individually strive to become better thinkers and individually
retain a sense that more is always possible, can as a group
bring to bear even more brainpower to any problem than a
single rationalist can.  Hence the rise of the Senseis, plural,
not the rise of the Sensei, singular.  Provided, of course,
that the rationalists remember to add the important
ingredients: a minimum amount of cooperation, clear
communications, a goal, and a structured disputation arena that
avoids groupthink, without which the stew of rationality
becomes a poisonous, self-defeating mob."

Verrens considered this for a moment, then said, "Ingredients
which, we hope, the Administrator, Raphael Yu, can provide in
the case of our characters."

"Yes," said Adams.  "And this, I suspect, is the difference
between this novel, and similar investigative novels: the tiny
community of people, all with at least minimum rationality
training, and two - the Judge and presumably, the Executor -
with the intermediate level of rationality training.  This
community of rationalists will, as a group, provide the insight
necessary to discover the truth, and not, as in a typical
investigative novel, only the privileged main character."

"Even if," said Verrens, "it is possible that one of them is a
saboteur that is attempting to subvert the thinking of the
group?"

This brought Adams to a stop.

Or rather, it appeared to bring Adams to a stop, because
suddenly Adams grinned.

"In much the same way," said Adams, "that a rational brain can
defeat self-deception, even as one of its modules attempts to
subvert its thinking, eh, Judge Verrens?"

That brought Verrens to an actual stop, and he simply shrugged
ruefully.

"The Fallacy of Gray," said Adams.  "Shall we review it?"

Verrens sighed.  "The Fallacy of Gray," he said, "is the error
of thinking that, because a thing cannot claim to have absolute
certainty, it must be classified with other things of low
certainty -"

"Not quite," said Adams, "although I suppose that it is the
definition given in the intermediate levels.  The preferred
formulation in the advanced levels of rationality training, as
I found in my amateur Sensei studies, is that the Fallacy of
Gray is the willful confusion of certainty with truth, such that
any hint of uncertainty is considered as direct proof - proof,
not even evidence, but incontrovertible proof - of non-truth.
But noise exists, and certainty is never possible.  There are
grays and then there are grays - some grays are so light that
in practice they are white, and some grays are so dark that
in practice they are black.  The Fallacy of Gray is replacing a
simplistic black-and-white view of the universe with an even
more ridiculously simplistic monocolor view of the universe."

"Thank you, Judge," said Verrens, "for pointing out a mistake in
my map."

"You're welcome," said Adams.  "And now let us, for the
Community, read on!"


Chapter 26

"After Julia told me," said Katja, "or rather, mumbled
vaguely about it while flailing around last night in
the boat checking for something, I remembered a minor
but strange detail about the sedatives we were given,
and the wakening gas that brought us up into
consciousness prior to the evacuation."

Katja paused, gauging the interest of her companions.

"Normally," she said, "a specific sedative is paired
with a specific wakening gas.  During Medic training,
I and a group of friends experimented with various
combinations of sedatives and wakening gases.  It's
actually one of the things that was taught to us, but
we preferred to confirm it for ourselves.  Anyway,
basically: using the wrong wakening gas can still
stimulate you to wakefulness, but you are, crucially
enough, slower, much less alert, and much more likely
to make mistakes than if you used the correct gas."

The charge was serious; the laws against mental
incapacitation were strict in most jurisdictions,
Nicole knew.

"As I mentioned," Katja said, "I had experimented with
such drugs during training - it's not exactly
discouraged, most Medic trainers want you to experience
them as much as feasible so that you get better empathy
for patient experiences - and I can identify the
different wakening gases by smell.  I didn't note it
immediately then - probably because the wakening gas
itself didn't wake me up enough - but I remembered it
later when Julia reminded me with her mutterings about
sabotage."

She breathed in, perhaps to clear her mind of the
remembered smell, and then she said, "Consider that while
we can probably expect the drop pod's bridge crew to not
be sedated, the cabin crew also sedate themselves after
offering the sedatives to the passengers.  And it's the
cabin crew that operates the lifeboats, isn't it, Julia?"

Julia stammered, looking at Raphael.

"It's a question of clarification," said Raphael.  "You
must speak to answer it, even out of turn, Julia.  You
may also give a short explanation provided it is solely
on topic to the question."

"Yes," said Julia, "that's what I would expect.  The
cabin crew has a different lifeboat that can self-eject,
unlike the others that are ejected externally, and is
larger than this one."

"And as I mentioned," said Katja, "the wrong wakening gas
can cause people to make mistakes.  Question of
clarification, Julia: if the cabin crew makes a mistake
in the ejection sequence, could it cause the drop lifeboat
to fail to fill the air bags properly, like in Michael's
lifeboat?"

Julia shook her head.  "Not really," said Julia.  "The
ejection sequence should be entirely automated.  Although -
if the automation fails, I would expect that it would be
possible to perform the sequence manually, and that the
cabin crew would be trained to perform the sequence
manually if necessary.  So yes, it's possible, in my expert
opinion.  Assuming that the automation fails, and the
sequence was done manually.  A classic failure cascade."

"Good," said Katja.  "I rest my case.  There was sabotage.
And the saboteur is on this boat, at least originally, so
Michael can't be the saboteur.  It's one of you three -
Raphael, Nicole, or Julia."

"Question of clarification," said Nicole angrily, "why do you
exempt yourself?"

"Because I'm not the saboteur!" said Katja.

"But you were originally on this boat -"

"Point of order," said Raphael.  "Judge, no challenges at
this point.  You can challenge it later during the synthesis
stage of the Nominal Group Technique.  Let the main idea
stand as stated by Katja; the group as a whole can decide to
modify it later."

"Anyway," said Katja, "I'm done."

"Question of clarification," said Raphael.  "How did the
saboteur ensure that this boat would be safe from a mistake
in the ejection sequence?"

"Simple," said Katja, "..."

She stopped.

"Okay," said Katja, "you almost got me there.  But I'm on to
you, accountant.  The sedatives are optional, although
practically everyone takes it.  The crewperson who operated
this lifeboat didn't take the sedative, and his or her
thinking was not impaired."

"That's speculation," said Raphael, "and -" he waved his
hand in front of his face - "I'm sorry, that was a challenge
and not allowed at this stage.  Sorry.  I'll save it for
later.  Julia, write down the addition as another main idea.
Does anyone else have any more questions of clarification?"

Nobody spoke up to ask more questions, so Raphael nodded to
Julia -

"Main ideas," said Julia, "Katja's reported observation is
that the wrong wakening gas was used; wrong wakening gas
causes mistakes; mistakes might cause failures of lifeboat
ejection; one of original members on this boat is saboteur,
one of Raphael, Nicole, or Julia; crewperson who ejected
this lifeboat is another saboteur.  Is that okay?"

"Thank you, Engineer," said Raphael.  "Now, let us proceed
to the next stage: synthesis.  It's the centripetal stage of
the Nominal Group Technique.  In this stage, we can each
give our reactions and reflections on each of the main ideas
generated and shared in the previous stage.  We can also move
to have an idea modified, or to be copied and then modified,
or to merge two or more ideas together, with the source ideas
either retained or removed.  Or the reverse operation, split
an idea into two or more ideas, with the source idea retained
or removed.  Ideas cannot be removed unless they are
modified, merged, or split.  That's important: ideas cannot
be deleted.  Modification and merging of ideas requires at
least three of us five to agree to it without either of the
remaining two objecting; or at least four of us to agree if
the remaining one objects.  I'd like to make the discussion
organized, although... give me a moment, okay?"

They let Raphael ponder for a while -

"Katja," said Raphael, "Medic, can we borrow the bottle of
shark repellent?"

"Why?" said Katja, genuinely puzzled.

"To use as the token," said Raphael.  "The token means that
whoever holds the token is the only one who can speak, in
order to give comments and reflections, and in order to
move for ideas to be modified, merged, or split.  The bottle
will float in the water?"

"Yes," said Katja, "I would assume so."  She took out the
bottle, still puzzled, and experimentally dropped it into
the water.  "Yes, it floats."

"Good," said Raphael, fishing it out of the water, "so in
case we mishandle it, I or the Executor can fetch it
easily.  I was thinking of using Julia's notepad or pen, but
we can't get the notepad wet and I doubt the pen will float.
Okay, rules for the token: only the current holder of the
token can give reflections or reactions to the ideas, and
initiate moves for modification or merging.  After the holder
has run out of things to say for the moment, he or she may
offer it to anyone who asks for it.  If multiple people ask
for it, the holder chooses who to give it to.  However, as
Administrator, I hold the right to override the choice if I
observe that someone is consistently being denied access to
the token -"

"Wouldn't you be able to abuse that?" said Michael.  "You
could always override who we choose, to give you an unfair
advantage at airing only your own ideas."

"- as I was about to say, Executor," said Raphael, "I have
the right to override the destination of the token, unless
two of you object, or, if one supports me, unless three of
you object.  In that case, the destination chosen by the
current holder is not overridden.  Democracy wins, okay?"

Michael shrugged, rocking their boat slightly.

"Also, when the holder moves to modify, merge, or split
ideas, the token rule still holds, but after proposing, the
holder should pass the token around so that others can
voice arguments for or against, promise to vote particular
ways if the exact wording is changed in particular ways,
etcetera.  However during this time the topic is restricted
to the motion being proposed, and after voting the token
reverts to the proposer.  Got that?"

"That," said Julia, "sounds complicated."

Raphael shrugged.  "True," he said, "but it keeps the
discussion from becoming a chaotic shouting match.  Is
that okay to everyone?"

There were shrugs and nods.

"Now," said Raphael, "the synthesis stage ends when the
holder of the token has nothing further to say, and no one
else asks for the token.  Then the ranking stage begins.
Does everyone agree to the procedure?"

There were nods of assent.

"Okay," said Raphael, "let me begin -"

Nicole raised her hand, and said, "Before the next stage,
everyone, first I'd like us all to recite the three litanies.
If that is all right, Administrator?"

Raphael blinked, and said, "If your moral expertise suggests
it, please lead us in the litanies, Madam Judge Angel."

She closed her eyes, breathed deeply, to help enter a
rationalist trance state.  The others would do the same, she
knew.

"Litany of Tarski," said Nicole, "repeat after me: If there
is a saboteur, and he or she is among us, then I desire to
believe that there is a saboteur, and he or she is among us.
If there is no saboteur, or he or she is not among us, then
I desire to believe that there is no saboteur, or he or she
is not among us.  Let me not become attached to beliefs I do
not desire."

She intoned, again, hearing the rest of the community repeat
the words they knew by heart: "Litany of Gendlin: What is
true is already so; owning up to it does not make it worse.
Not being open about it does not make it go away; and because
it is true, it is there to be lived.  Anything that is untrue
isn't there to be lived.  I can stand what is true, for I am
already enduring it."

And finally: "Litany of Occam: If a possibility is simple,
then I shall consider it more.  If a possibility is complex,
then I shall consider it less.  The truth is usually simple;
but occasionally it is complex.  The truth is sometimes
complex; but often it is simple.  My judgment of simplicity
or complexity may be wrong: 'the lady down the street is a
witch, she did it' is not simple."

There was a moment of reverent silence.


Chapter 27

Verrens eyes were welling as he finished the chapter.

Fortunately for him, Adams was not yet finished with the
chapter; Verrens struggled to keep his composure.

"Huh," said Adams as he lay down the papers of the chapter.
"The litanies.  I don't see them appear often in these
novels.  Honestly, I approve of them, although some people,
I think, get too attached to them."

"Ah -" was all Verrens could say.

Adams frowned.  "I presume from your expression," he said,
"that you are one of them.  Although I can say I
understand; the instinct of numinosity was harnessed in
the formulation of these litanies in the first place.  The
litanies, as I gather from my amateur Sensei research, were
a vital component in the initial rise of the Senseis,
without which many of the early Senseis would not have
been able to gather with like-minded rationality experts.
But the art involved in its writing is very slightly Dark;
it triggers a well of numinosity within each human brain.
Well, then, let me rephrase it: the litanies are not to my
taste and I have no real need of them, but I suppose many,
many more find them useful and so keep them to heart.  So I
suppose I can understand why the author included them."

"Yes, Judge," said Verrens.

"Anyway," said Adams, "let us move on.  It appears that our
amateur Administrator, Raphael Yu, is able to keep some
semblance of order, and hopefully his procedure can allow
clear communications."

"Yes," said Verrens.  "Although we have only been told a
description of the procedure, and not how well it works in
their situation."

"Agreed," said Adams.  "Although knowing the designer of the
plot, I suspect the procedure is at least an old standard
among Administrators."

"So, Judge," said Verrens, "you think that the disputation
arena will be successful?"

"Not only that," said Adams, "I would bet also that the
disputation arena will conclude that there is no saboteur,
and that the disputation arena will be only a setup for
another test for aspiring Judge Nicole Angel.  Shall we
read and see for ourselves?"


Chapter 28

"The first and most important thing I want to mention,"
said Raphael, "is that I move that Katja's idea 'one of
Raphael, Nicole, or Julia is the saboteur' should also
include Katja's name."

"I agree," said Julia firmly.

"I object!" said Katja, "I was the one who -"

"Point of order," said Raphael.  "Please, let's keep
things organized.  Let me finish why I think the proposal
should pass, then we pass around the token to discuss.
The token will pass to you, Julia and Katja, so please be
patient."

He kept looking at Katja until she dropped her gaze and
shrugged.

"I think," said Raphael, "that strictly from what Katja
said, there is no real way to rule out the possibility of
her involvement.  The idea, by itself, also suggests that
there is only one saboteur; I would also like the wording
to be modified, so a better wording would be: 'saboteur or
saboteurs are among original members of lifeboat: Katja,
Raphael, Nicole, and Julia.'"

He proffered the bottle to Katja.  "Katja," he said,
"shall you take your turn, or would anyone else like to
have the token?"

Julia and Nicole raised their hands, but Katja grabbed the
token.

"If I were the saboteur," she said, "why would I bring up
that possibility?  I wouldn't do something that would cast
suspicion on me, because if I did, you would no longer
believe my statements.  So I can't be the saboteur!"

Nicole and Raphael raised their hands.

But Katja didn't pass the token to either of them.

"What's the point?" she said.  "The saboteur is one of you
three.  And of course the saboteur will try to confuse the
disputation arena.  So I don't stand a chance anyway."  She
tossed the bottle into the middle of the boat.

"Point of order, Medic," said Raphael, "the current topic is
about the motion to modify the idea's wording and include
you among the possible saboteur candidates.  Even if you
have the token -"

"Oh, so you want to shut me up?" said Katja.  "Stop me from
talking?  I think that proves that you're the saboteur."

"Katja," said Raphael, "I was speaking in the capacity as
Administrator; I was simply repeating and clarifying the
rules of the procedure that -"

"Excuse me, Administrator," said Nicole.  "This is now a
moral transgression and thus my field.  Katja, you
precommitted to a procedure specified by an Administrator -"

"Accountant!" Katja bit off.

"Administrator," said Nicole.  "And if you renege on your
precommitment to the community, the community will be
forced to apply a punishment on you.  We don't really have
many resources with which to punish you softly, so the only
punishments we might be able to apply will be the more
extreme punishments - exile, for example.  So, Katja,
please -"

"Are you threatening me?" said Katja.

"Yes," said Nicole.  "Do you want me to pass Judgment on
your case?  Continue to do this, Medic, and my Judgment
will go against you.  Remember: you also earlier promised
to give Raphael a chance at proving that he is not, in
fact, a jerk at all times.  I think his attempts at
organizing our disputation arena and keeping our
communications sane, in a capacity that he is not formally
expert in but which he has professed an amateur fascination
for, show him in a good light."

Katja's defiance seemed sure for a while, but then it
wavered.  She bowed her head in submission.  "I'm sorry.
I'm sorry, Raphael.  I should have called you by your
proper vocation: Administrator."

"It's not," said Raphael.  "I am an accountant, that's my
registered formal vocation.  Although you obviously used it
as an insult, well, I'm not insulted.  I'm an accountant,
and that's fine, I'll still be an accountant after we are
rescued and I still won't be an Administrator, at least not
until I get the full training and the works.  For now, I am
Administrator because of circumstance."  He winced a little.
"You know, now I'm even more sorry for swimming off because
Julia called out the uselessness of accountancy in an
extreme situation.  It's still useful outside of this
situation, it's a high-paying if boring vocation.  And at
least being bored with it got me interested into
Administration, which is a little useful now, right?"  He
smiled, and pointed at the token.  "Medic, if you please?"

Katja picked up the token, then said, "So who wants it next?"

Again Raphael and Nicole raised their hands; Katja passed it
to Nicole.  "Katja," said Nicole, "exempting yourself
tightens your accusation against the three of us.  Protesting
that you are not the saboteur is fine, but it is meaningless
in our case: of course the saboteur, or saboteurs as Raphael
pointed out, would protest their innocence just as loudly.
And a saboteur may very well also point out this possibility
in order to reduce suspicion on himself or herself.  So no,
your word is not enough.  It's one thing to be Michael and
not be in this boat in the first place.  It's another thing
to be here and bring up a possibility that someone on the
boat is the saboteur, but then exempt yourself from the
suspects."  She raised the token and asked, "So who wants it
next?  Raphael?"

Raphael shook his head.  "You already said it, Judge."

Nobody raised a hand to ask for the token, so Raphael
said, "Okay, now we vote.  First, any objections?  Katja?
You withdraw your objection?  Okay, Julia?  Michael?
Nicole?  No objections, so three votes 'for' will suffice.
Raise your hands to vote 'for' - unanimous except for
Katja.  Proposal passes, please modify the idea, Julia."

While Julia crossed out the idea and rewrote the modified
form, Raphael picked up the token again.

"Okay," he said.  "The next thing I want to mention is
about the issue of Paranoid Debate.  I agree: yes in
fact we are playing Paranoid Debate.  There are two
important things to remember about this."

He raised two fingers.  "One is that, if there is at
least one saboteur, they will try to twist our expected
result towards the result 'there is no saboteur.'  This
holds no matter how many saboteurs there are."

He ticked off the second finger.  "The other is that,
knowing the first fact, non-saboteurs will be tempted to
present information that supports the hypothesis 'there
is at least one saboteur,' while suppressing information
that supports the hypothesis 'there is no saboteur,' in
order to attempt to signal that they are non-saboteurs.
The saboteurs will attempt to imitate this as protective
camouflage, but try to arrange information to point to
someone they think is not a saboteur - assuming that the
saboteurs, if there are more than one, are trying to
cooperate with each other.  If they are not cooperating,
well, they will still attempt to present information that
points to someone else anyway."

He made a fist.  "So I think that we should be suspicious
at attempts to fix the identity of the saboteur.  Instead,
we should first establish if there is at least one saboteur
on this boat at all: a simple 'yes there is at least one'
or 'no there are no saboteurs on this boat at all.'
Because then the choices are clear-cut: actual saboteurs
will attempt to twist the result towards 'no,' while
non-saboteurs will want to get the best result, which is
towards reality, as per Litany of Tarski.  The existence
of a saboteur means that the non-saboteurs will present
information that suggests there is, but the saboteurs
will present information that suggests there are none.  On
the other hand, the absence of saboteurs means all of us
will present information that, in total, suggests there are
none.  So assuming there are more non-saboteurs than
saboteurs on this boat, we can still get at least the
correct information: communal rationality can still win.
So I propose that we can safely ignore the fact that we are
playing Paranoid Debate: if there are one or two saboteurs,
we can get hints of who they are if we focus on answering
the simpler 'yes'-'no' question, and only that question.
If there are none, we all, as an aggregate, will conclude
that there are none, as long as we remember our
precommitment to truth and avoid biasing towards presenting
information that there are none - that is, if we avoid
signaling.  If there are three or more saboteurs - then the
non-saboteurs are probably doomed anyway."

Raphael idly touched his cheek.  "In conclusion: we can
ignore the fact that we are playing Paranoid Debate.
Because: If there are no saboteurs, then each of us, being
honest non-saboteurs, will be able to present a lot of
evidence that there are no saboteurs.  If there are a few
saboteurs, then the non-saboteurs will present some
evidence for saboteurs and only a little evidence against
it, but saboteurs will present only evidence against it: if
they don't, they would lose.  So in this particular case,
we can detect hidden deceivers."

He fell silent, hand still clutching the token.  After a
while, Michael raised his hand, followed by Nicole, asking
to get the token.

"Wait," said Raphael.  "It's irregular, since it's a
modification to a precommitted procedure we're already
undertaking, but hear me out -"

He waited until Michael and Nicole lowered their hands,
their expressions quizzical.

"I move that we modify the procedure: we restrict ourselves
strictly to speaking only about the 'yes'-'no' question,
without specifically pointing to identify who.  Any
mention of identities is forbidden, and this will be a moral
precommitment that our Judge shall pass Judgment upon.  This
makes it harder for saboteurs, if they exist, to hide among
us.  I'm sorry, I should have thought of it earlier before we
started.  But anyway: what do you think, everyone?"


Chapter 29

"Hmmm," said Adams as he finished the chapter.  "A
complicated solution, Administrator Yu.  Or so it would
seem.  What do you think of Administrator Yu's attempt to
make moot the fact that they are playing Paranoid Debate,
Judge Verrens?"

Verrens paused, his hand raised.

He was visualizing a featureless white room -

- Adams timed it.  A proper crisis of faith needed
time, and he was almost sure that Verrens was cutting it
too close -

- and when the trance was over, Verrens lowered his
hand.

"Yes, Lord Judge," he said, "I agree with Administrator
Yu -"


Chapter 30

On the boat, again, chaos reigned.  Michael argued with
Raphael, Julia occasionally remarking, Katja sullenly
watching as she contributed only her opposition to
Raphael's proposal.

But in one corner of the boat, (not yet a) Judge Nicole
Angel sat silent.  Had her companions bothered to look,
they would have noticed that she was in a trance; that
physically she was sitting in a boat lost somewhere in
the expansive oceans of Humanity's home Earth. but she
herself was not there.  Not really.

In her mind, she was inside an empty, featureless, white
room, with nothing to view.

In her mind, she held mental tools to assist her, as she
undertook the hardest trial that any Human could undergo:
find out if she should change her mind.

On the mental tools were carved ancient words of great and
eldritch power: "Do not complete the old pattern!"; "Use
the 'try' harder: make an effort, do not just give up";
"Your brain does not know for certain: do not immediately
propose solutions"; "Search carefully for the thought at
the back of your mind"; "Attack the weak points of your
belief: you're doing it a favor by checking it!"; "You
are better off believing something, if it is true, even if
it feels bad: at least now you can do something about
it!"; "Do not argue on only one side of the debate";
"Expect nothing from the evidence: take no sides and be
neutral"; "Feel the weight of each burdensome detail:
simplify"; "Do not be motivated to move or stay
anywhere: let the winds of evidence blow you where you
should be"; "Let your belief go: if it returns then it was
true, if not, then it never should have been yours to
begin with"; "Do not let your thoughts repeat: if a
thought has already occurred to you before, block it out
and replace it with another"; "The feeling of being
correct is indistinguishable from the feeling of being
incorrect" ...

In her mind, she whispered: "tsuyoku naritai."  I want to
become stronger: more rational, more knowledgeable, more
ethical.

In her mind, she whispered: "isshoukenmei."  With all my
brain's will and strength: I will take as much effort of
will is necessary to find the option that is true, the map
that models the territory, the belief that reflects
reality.

She did not breath deeply, as it could serve as a trigger to
unwanted cached associations.  She let it remain even and
regular, as neutral as the empty white featureless room she
was (imagining herself to be) in.

As her companions bickered, within her mind she asked herself
the question: "Is Raphael correct, that limiting the explicit
discussion to only the question 'is there at least one
saboteur on this boat?' would be superior and avoid problems
of cooperating in an environment where potential traitors
exist?"

And she thought -

One argument against Raphael's proposal was that it was
complex ("Feel the weight of each burdensome detail:
simplify").  Or was it? ("Your brain does not know for
certain: do not immediately propose solutions")

But the question being considered in the disputation arena
was complex.

It was to be expected that thinking about it would be
difficult, and so it was likely that Raphael was incorrect.

Wait: what was that thought again? ("Search carefully for
the thought at the back of your mind")

The question itself was complex: In a game of Paranoid
Debate, what would happen if the question was "Who are the
deceivers?"  The optimal strategy for a deceiver would be
to point the evidence towards someone else, diluting the
pool of evidence, possibly to the point of uselessness.

But: if you rephrased the question to "Is there at least
one deceiver?", what would the optimal strategy for a
deceiver be?

Well, it definitely could not be "point the evidence
towards someone else," because what Raphael was proposing
was that evidence pointing to specific identities was to
be made inadmissable.

By simplifying the question to that extent, the only
available strategies to a deceiver would be: (1) twist
the evidence towards 'no', (2) do not twist the evidence,
(3) twist the evidence towards 'yes'.  Were there others?
("Use the 'try' harder: make an effort, do not just give
up")

Wait - the end effect of (2) and (3) was the same!  There
were only two actual available strategies for a deceiver:
(1) twist the evidence towards 'no' (2) allow the group
consensus to settle towards 'yes'.  Picking (2) would be
directly losing.  Picking (1) would cause the deceiver to
stick out like a sore thumb among non-deceivers who would
honestly present evidence suggesting the existence of
deceivers.

So it seemed that Raphael was correct.

But wait: what if Raphael was wrong? ("Do not argue on
only one side of the debate")

What would the world be like if the better choice was to
find who the deceivers were, rather than whether they
existed?

On the surface, it was a more direct path to their
ultimate end goal: they wanted to know who the saboteurs
were so that they could protect themselves against
further attempts at sabotage, and, if there was a larger
organization that would attempt to pick up the saboteurs,
they could possibly attempt to keep them as hostages in
order to negotiate for their continued survival
(admittedly a long shot if it came to that, but better by
far than the alternatives).

But as Raphael had pointed out, the more complex question
gave enough strategies for deceivers to game the - scratch
that, she had already thought of that; her physical hand
actually waved in front of her face to swipe off that
thought ("Do not let your thoughts repeat: if a thought
has already occured to you before, block it out and
replace it with another").

She needed to challenge that belief, not strengthen it
("Attack the weak points of your belief: you're doing it a
favor by checking it!").

Well, what if Raphael was a deceiver?  How would
proposing this modification cause them to be more likely
to decide that there were no saboteurs, or that the
saboteurs were someone other than Raphael?

Perhaps he knew that some evidence that was already shown
in the presented ideas would identify him directly, and
so Raphael wanted to remove that evidence?

Wait - the only idea that involved Raphael was that
Raphael swimming away was an attempt to contact and be
rescued by the larger organization sponsoring the
sabotage!

Perhaps Raphael was trying to suppress this particular
bit of evidence?

In fact, it made sense: Raphael was, by his admission,
more than just an accountant.  Perhaps another of his
hobbies was some form of Engineering?  That would allow
him to know how to sabotage the drop pod.  Obviously he
was strong enough a swimmer - another point to choose
him as the saboteur of a vehicle that would drop to the
ocean.  His sponsoring organization would then somehow
delay the legitimate rescue to extract their saboteur.
And - no, wait, she'd been mislead by her brain! ("Feel
the weight of each burdensome detail: simplify")

Quickly, inside her mind she recited again the Litany
of Occam.

An accountant who was an amateur Administrator made some
sort of sense: the movement of large amounts of money
often represented trading the efforts of large groups of
people, which would have to be coordinated by
Administrators.  And then there was the direct evidence
that showed that Raphael did have at least some
knowledge of Administration: witness the obscure
disputation arena that he was able to explain to them,
Notional Group Technique.  (No, wait, sorry Raphael,
that was Nominal Group Technique.)  In fact, one might
have grounds to doubt if Raphael was indeed an
accountant: there was no evidence of skill in that field
so far (not that there would be a chance to practice it
in a survival situation like this one).

But add the detail of having someone interested in not
just Administration, but in Engineering.  That would be
the intersection of people interested in Administration,
and people interested in Engineering, so people
interested in both Administration and Engineering would
be fewer than people who were interested in one of them.

Then add the further detail of being a member of some
large nebulous organization.  Not just any organization,
but one that was capable of hindering the rescue
operations, and one that, despite the difficulties,
wanted to sabotage a planetary drop pod.  More
burdensome details!

So scratch that line of thought -

- later, when her will was exhausted, she was almost
sure that Raphael's new procedure was better.  In
fact, she was already well on her way to thinking
through the question itself; she was already willing
to bet at even odds that there was no saboteur on the
boat (but not necessarily that there was no saboteur at
all), and perhaps willing to make a smaller side bet
(say at 20% stakes of the main bet) at two to one
against that there was no saboteur on the boat.

And so she broke her trance, and lifting her voice to
cut through the chaotic hubbub of the rest of the
community, she said, "Silence!  Pay attention to me!
I've thought through the ramifications of Raphael's
new proposal, which you should have been doing instead
of arguing.  The proposal is sound, and as Judge, I
would like to compel our community to use the new
proposal."

It was only after she had uttered this in an imperious
tone that the parts of her brain that had been paying
attention to the real world informed her that her
companions had already been silent and staring at her
for quite some time now.

She was red with embarrasment at having dived into her
trance so deep, but she persevered in making them
change the procedure anyway.


Chapter 31

Verrens chuckled as he finished reading the chapter.
"Lord Judge," he said, "it is almost eerie how closely
my argument follows that of Nicole Angel."

"Is it?" said Adams.  "Well, if so, then perhaps I can
skip over it and read just the ending, then.  Or is
there some minor detail that is different between
Nicole's train of thought and your earlier argument for
supporting Raphael's proposal to change the procedure?"

"Ah," said Verrens, "none actually, Judge.  And please
don't skip the chapter -"

Adams promptly skipped to the last page of the chapter.

"Well," said Adams, "as I was saying earlier, the
likelihood of sabotage is low.  And the argument you
expressed earlier was solely about how Raphael's
new procedure was superior; again, you are slower than
Nicole.  But then, you said earlier that you would bet
at odds of five to one against sabotage, whereas Nicole
is still at the stage where she would bet at even odds
against sabotage; or rather, against the saboteur being
in the same boat as she is, which is a strictly lower
probability than sabotage."

"Yes, Judge," said Verrens.  "As written, it is good
to see a more detailed description of changing one's
own mind, especially considering that the aim of the
novel is to educate and test aspiring Judges.
However - Judge Adams, I am truly amazed at how
Nicole's train of thought follows mine!"

"Don't be," said Adams.  "Or be amazed, but do not
consider it impossible.  Aumann's Agreement Theorem
states that two rationalists with the same initial
assumptions and the same knowledge of the evidence
will end up agreeing, after all.  It is not possible
for rationalists to agree to disagree: they can agree
to defer discussion later in favor of higher priority
actions, but then they would not have common
knowledge of the issue under discussion, since the
discussion is prematurely cut short."

"Doesn't Aumann's, strictly speaking, apply only to
the case that the rationalists have common
knowledge of the posteriors?" said Verrens.  "As in,
Alice and Bob know, Alice knows that Bob knows, Bob
knows Alice knows Bob knows, and so on?"

"True," said Adams.  "And in your case the knowledge
is unidirectional: both Verrens and Angel know, but
only Verrens knows that Angel knows.  Still,
reasonably speaking you are being given the same
information about the event in question; assuming
both of you have similar backgrounds - both of you
are young Judges who came here to Earth from the Mars
Lagrange 1 colony for the Judge examination, and so
on - and knowing you are being given the same
information, you will produce approximately the same
conclusions."

"But the precise similarity -"

"- is not in fact precise," said Adams.  "Remember
that Nicole currently assigns a higher probability
towards sabotage than you do.  She will bet only at
even odds; you would bet at greater odds for no
sabotage versus lesser odds against it."

Verrens nodded.

"See?" said Adams.  "Now we agree, given sufficient
time to discuss a topic: Aumann's Agreement."

"Judge," said Verrens, "it makes me wonder - in a
rational society, then, such structures as
disputation arenas or democracy would not be
necessary.  Aumann's Agreement Theorem would
preclude the necessity of such structures."

"In a perfectly rational society, maybe," said
Adams.  "But as you know, Humanity has not yet
achieved perfect rationality.  We can be extremely
rational at some times, we can be somewhat rational
at all times, but Humanity has not yet achieved the
ideal of perfect rationality at all times.
Consider the characters of the novel; both Raphael
Yu and Ekaterina Ivanova showed irrationality at
times of stress.  And arguably Julia Montega, when
Katja revealed the possibility of sabotage; she was
kess than helpful in revealing important
information, until Administrator Yu initiated a
disputation arena to gather relevant information."
He sniffed.  "Although we might argue that those
are generalizations from fictional evidence, this
novel is, as I have insisted before, true - in a
way.  Thus, it would not be fallacious to
generalize from the evidence presented in this
novel; it strives to reflect reality as closely as
possible, after all."

"Even though events such as failed planetary drops
are extremely unlikely, Judge?" said Verrens.

Adams grinned.

"Ah, my young Judge," he said.  "You once revealed
to me an ending of a chapter by revealing only the
existence of a secret.  Afterwards I repaid this
faux pas by revealing the existence of another
secret.  Which would have been quite fair to both of
us, tit for tat, but now you leave yourself open to
another revelation of another existing secret."

Verrens appeared puzzled.  "I'm sorry, Judge," he
said, "I don't -"

Then he stopped.

Afterwards, he said, "Oh.  I see.  But how?"

"How?" said Adams, grinning even wider.  "Why, the
most obvious possible method: by being more likely
than all the other alternatives.  Although I suppose
you were asking, 'how were the characters put into
this current situation?'  Well, as to that, I leave
you to your speculations!  I know too much already,
from the few clues already given, about the truth;
it would be a tremendous faux pas for me to give
to you my own speculations, as Aumann's would
automatically reveal everything to you.  So I leave
that secret as another puzzle for you."

"Judge, spare me!" said Verrens.  "I still have to
solve your earlier puzzle!"

"Ah, yes," said Adams, "the vexing question of what
moral dilemma will Nicole have to experience at the
end of this particular disputation arena.  Do not
worry, for there seems to be no clues at all so far
as to what the moral dilemma will be.  And my
speculation that there will be one lies in extra
information, about particular patterns that the
plot designer tends to follow.  This is knowledge
I have derived by reading numerous productions and
versions of novels by the plot designer."

"And I think, Judge, that it is then unfair to
expect me to speculate properly," said Verrens.

"Yes," said Adams, "for this older puzzle it is
indeed unfair, as it is simply my personal revenge
on you.  But for the new puzzle, the clues have been
embedded in the novel; I reveal it with no
additional hidden information that you have not seen
for yourself written in the novel.  But I leave the
new puzzle to you; let us move on to other topics."

"Well," said Verrens, as he groped for something
to bring up, "we were earlier talking about Aumann's
Agreement Theorem and the social structures such as
the various disputation arenas, and democracy.  Or
even Administration, for that matter.  Speaking
completely hypothetically, Judge, if we were to
achieve perfect rationality, then we would be able
to dispense with such things, as they would be far
less efficient than allowing Aumann's to take hold."

"Would they, Judge?" said Adams.  "I rather think
that it is precisely those social machines that
allow Aumann's Agreement Theorem to actually work.
Remember, we need to achieve a stable state of
common knowledge, before Aumann's Agreement Theorem
forces all rational participants to the same
decision.  Social machinery such as disputation
arenas allow rational participants to achieve
common knowledge."

"Ah," said Verrens.  "So in a perfect rational
society, they are still necessary."

"It is not just such social machinery that is
necessary," said Adams.  "Assuming that the
Microgenetics Scientists someday figure out how to
let us self-modify to perfect rationality, the
community of Judges would still be necessary."

"How so, Judge?" said Verrens.

"Rationality - particularly instrumental
rationality - is used in order to win," said Adams.
"In particular, it does not define what constitutes
as a win.  Those are values.  The early Senseis,
like all modern Humans, inherited a complex
biological computer composed of barely-working
hacks.  They decided that the most important problem
to tackle was rationality - to achieve consistency
in striving towards the goals; to be able to rank
our values to determine what, in the worst case, we
would find least distasteful to sacrifice; and to
determine accurate maps towards our precommitted,
stated goals - and left the problem of defining the
actual goals that Humanity should pursue to us.
And when I say 'us', I mean us the Judges.  It is
up to us to figure out the best system to determine
what we truly value, using as reference what we
experimentally determine to be the values of our
Human brains.  Of course, such values are as
inconsistent and unclear as the hacked rationality
cores of the brain, but it has allowed some
important backward-compatibility with pre-rational
and proto-rational Human brains."

"Why didn't the Senseis start with attempting to fix
our values?" said Verrens.

"Mostly", said Adams, "because Humanity, back then, 
had values that they shared almost universally, but
which individuals pursued in haphazard, not very
rational methods.  Two different people with
exactly the same values might very well have sworn
oaths to kill one another, because of their equally
irrational views of how to achieve their ultimately
shared values.  As an optimization problem, there
was a better ratio of results to effort in fixing
the rationality of Human beings.  For another,
consider that rationality is an important tool to
us Judges, in studying the ramifications of various
ethical systems.  You might as well ask why the
early Scientists started with studying the physical
world first, rather than with mental rationality or
with values: at that time, understanding the
physical world gave the best improvement in the
Human condition, and incidentally also provided
secondary tools for the improvement of
rationality.  It was the discovered results of the
Neurological and Sociological branches of Science,
after all, that the Senseis used as the basis of
their techniques."

Adams had a faraway look.

"Instrumental rationality and epistemic
rationality," he said.  "The two different things
that a modern Human might be talking about when
he or she says the word 'rationality'.  Epistemic
rationality: the act of making your map correspond
to the territory, and the center of most of the
actual techniques that modern Humans are taught as
part of the basic and intermediate rationality
training.  Instrumental rationality: achieving the
values you have declared your precommitment to,
and assisted by techniques of changing your mind
and techniques against akrasia.  Or, to be short
and pithy: to win."

Adams looked back at Verrens.  "Well," he said,
"Judge Verrens, please consider at least your
new puzzle as you read on.  As for the old
puzzle, well, please think of it simply as a
good-natured prank played on you by a garrulous
old trickster Judge.  So, let us continue."


Chapter 32

"- because I think, Judge," said Michael, "that
Raphael is attempting to suppress the only evidence
which directly points to a particular individual.
Because that evidence points directly to him: the
fact that he attempted to swim away, which suggests
that he was actually trying to somehow get rescued
by his organization before the governmental rescue
operations reach us.  None of the other ideas we
presented were so specific towards anyone.  It's the
only evidence that could point to a specific person.
Not only that: notice that his ideas - about the
relationship of the distance between lifeboats and
the time to rescue - was largely mooted by actual
expert opinion from an Engineer.  Julia knows that
the lifeboats are expected to be near each other but
far from the drop pod's final crash site.  And
finally: another piece of evidence, Katja's
assertion that this boat was specifically chosen to
work correctly, which exempts me, would also be
invalidated.  Raphael is attempting to point the
evidence away from himself and towards me!"

Nicole said -

- was about to speak, when Raphael said "Fine,
then, I withdraw my proposal."

"Why?" said Nicole.  "I don't - ah, because it would
be a moral hazard for you, Administrator?"

Raphael toyed with the bottle of shark repellant, the
token unused and unuseable until the issues
regarding the precise procedure to follow in the
interrupted Nominal Group Technique could be settled.

"Yes, Judge," said Raphael.  "Insisting on this means
that I would take on less risk than the rest of the
community does; the removal of ideas that point to
specific individuals is, now that I think about it,
biased towards me.  Consider the case that I am not
the saboteur; then I reduce the risk of being
mislabelled as the saboteur.  On the other hand, in
the case that I am indeed the saboteur, I reduce the
risk of being correctly identified.  I defer to your
moral expertise, Judge, but this seems clear enough
for a non-expert judgment."

"Even if I were to then re-open this proposal,
Administrator?" said Nicole.

"Then I would respectfully abstain from voting for
or against the proposal, Judge," said Raphael.
"The moral hazard would still hold.  You would then
have to convince at least two of the other people in
our community to support this proposal."

"Which I doubt you will be able to," said Michael.
"Since it seems obvious to the rest of us that Raphael
is trying to mislead the community with this tactic."

Nicole understood well what it would mean.

It would mean she would have to shut up and do the
impossible.

"Impossible" in this case did not mean a mathematically
proven impossibility, or some logical inconsistency.
Rather, it was simply the result of a limited brain not
seeing a path from its current situation to its desired
outcome: the reasons for why you can't win in a
situation, set in tension against the reasons why you
absolutely, completely, unavoidably cannot afford to not
win in that situation.  "Impossible" was not the same as
a mathematical impossible.

"Impossible" simply meant "I can't see any way to do
that."

And what she would have to do was to start somewhere,
start with some solution, and see if she got anywhere.

Because sometimes - just sometimes - the map inside your
brain did not match the territory.  And maybe - just
maybe - if you took a closer look at the territory, if
you tried to start somewhere, anywhere at all, and tried
to climb the territory, then maybe you could find a path
that you had not marked.

Sometimes, just sometimes, and maybe, just maybe, what
you had thought was "impossible" was in fact possible.

Things that looked impossible sometimes did not match
surface appearances.  A thousand years ago, people
might have thought it impossible for mere Humanity to be
able to discover how Human minds worked; and not just
discover how Human minds worked, but also to develop
tricks and techniques to make Human minds work better.
Such a thing would have been impossible, then, to the
point that mere pre-rational humans could not even
imagine dividing the human mind into smaller, more
easily understandable parts.  Philosophers in that
backward era might very well have thought that a self was
indivisible; they were completely oblivious and
completely ignorant of the many sub-agents composing a
Human mind.

What could Nicole do, in the face of "impossible?"

What was needed was perseverance.  Perseverance that
worked across timescales: pre-rational humans might
have rejected such impossible tasks in mere seconds,
and she would have to persevere against such
split-second System 1 reflexes.  Perseverance against
the growing mound of apparently impossible sub-tasks,
reducing her will after the initial flush of decision
abated - perseverance in the face of growing akrasia.

She would have to start somewhere.  How would she
convince the other members of the community to support
the proposal?  What evidence could she present that
would change their minds?

And the solution - no, not the solution completely,
but at least a solution, a start, a place from which
she could climb higher to get a better view of the
territory, to search for paths that she could not
imagine existing.

"So, Julia, Katja, Michael," she said, "what evidence
could I present that would change your minds?  What
would convince you to support this proposal?"

Michael laughed.  "Why, there is no evidence that
would convince me to actually support the proposal!"
he said.

Katja appeared to agree; Julia did not seem to be as
supportive of Michael's position, but -

Well, Nicole could try to convince Julia; then she
would be faced with the lesser problem of trying to
convince one of Michael or Katja to support the
change in procedure.  How could she do that?

And then Nicole noticed what exactly Michael had
said.

And Nicole now had her next step.


Chapter 33

"The solution to Nicole's problem - at least her
'next step' - seems obvious, does it not?" said
Adams, as he put aside the papers of the chapter.

Verrens, distracted as he was considering his own
thoughts, took some time before he could answer.

"Sorry, Judge," he said.  "I was still thinking of
the new puzzle you gave to me."

Adams smirked.  "Really, Judge?" he said.  "I
wonder, were you in fact able to actually read this
chapter, or were you too distracted to easily
comprehend it?"

"No, Judge," said Verrens.  "I did read it with full
comprehension, although I confess my primary focus
was in gleaning clues to your new puzzle.  In any
case it is obvious that, in order to solve this
current situation, the next thing that Nicole
should do would be to -"

"If it's so obvious, Judge," said Adams, "then let
us not discuss it anymore; we agree to its
obviousness, we have read the same chapter in
parallel, we are both Judges and we have been
reading the same novel so far, and thus we are
likely at an Aumann's Agreement.  So let me then
focus on a topic where I have deliberately avoided
Aumann's Agreement: the new puzzle.  What have you
so far gleaned, then?"

"Well, Lord Judge," said Verrens, "the main thing I
have gleaned is the existence of a secret.  First I
had asked you about the incongruence of a novel
that seeks to assign proper, realistic probabilities
to all events, versus the very basis of the plot,
specifically, the failed planetary drop pod.  Failure
of the planetary drop pod is an unlikely event, thus
the novel's premise is a very unlikely story.  Then
you revealed the existence of a secret."

"Good, so far," said Adams.  "Continue."

"You revealed it," said Verrens, "and also claimed
that this secret was itself something I could have
discovered for myself.  You had also earlier pointed
out that sabotage was unlikely, even though the
rhythm of an investigative novel demands that a
similarly significant event must have occurred, and
that the rhythm of such stories demands that one of
the characters presented in the novel must have
actually caused the event.  Thus, by symmetry, I
conclude: the planetary drop pod did not fail!"

"Yes," said Adams, "correct so far.  But what
evidence have you gathered from the novel itself?"

Verrens shook his head.  "I wish," he said, "that I
could restart reading the novel again at this
point.  Perhaps then I could glean even more clues,
Lord Judge."

"Disallowed," said Adams.  "That would be less fun
than watching you persevere onwards.  And I fear
that we would have too little time to actually
finish reading the novel, if we were to repeat it at
this point.  So: no clues from the novel itself,
rather than from me?"

"None, Judge," said Verrens.  "Although -"

"Yes?" said Adams.

"Another clue," said Verrens, "which I have
gleaned - again not from the novel, but from you.
I'm sorry, Lord Judge, but I have yet to find a clue
in the actual novel.  In any case, I suspect that
your earlier puzzle - about a moral issue that
Nicole will face after the disputation arena
concludes - is not in fact a puzzle, or a joke
played by some crazy old trickster.  It is,
instead, a clue, and one which I failed to pick up
on earlier.  Tsuyoku naritai - I wish to become
stronger."

Adams shook his head.  "Not even that, Judge
Verrens," he said.  "Isshoukenmei - a desperate
effort is needed.  But that is not enough, either.
It must be 'shut up and do the impossible'.  Can you
figure out why exactly Nicole and her companions are
in this situation, when the planetary drop pod did
not in fact fail?  Can you figure this out before the
flow of the novel reveals it?"

"Yes, Sensei," said Verrens, smiling.  "I shall do
the impossible!"

Adams laughed.  "Well," he said, "then let us
proceed, so that both you and Nicole can shut up and
do the impossible!"


Chapter 34

"Michael," said Nicole, "why would you say that no evidence can
ever make you change your mind?"

"Because it's obvious, Madam Judge," said Michael, "that the
circumstantial evidence adds up to Raphael's guilt.  There is a
saboteur among us, and it is Raphael."

"Ah," said Nicole, "you mean to say that you have reached the
bottom line of your reasoning, and have a final conclusion?"

"Yes," said Michael.

"And further evidence will not move your choice?" said Nicole.

"None whatsoever, Madam Judge," said Michael.

"So," said Nicole, "you have fixed your estimate of probability
to a flat 1.0, and you have reached the bottom line while
others in your community have not reached it, and are approaching
contrary destinations - in spite of the evidence already
presented being common knowledge to us all.  You do understand
the meaning of this, Sir Executor?"

In rationality training, the 'bottom line' referred to the final
conclusion you derived and considered most likely true.

And the one of the more important parts of rationality training
was to suppress the built-in urge to start by filling in the
bottom line and then writing justifications above it.

Michael was being irrational.  Which was disturbing, since he was
an Executor, and Executors were required to take at least the
first half of the intermediate rationality training; many opted
to take the entire intermediate rationality course.  Executors
were trained in many techniques to incapacitate and disable
fellow Human beings; and Judges (and trainees near their
examinations, although a brief review of events often revealed
this to curious aspiring and amateur Judges) were also informed,
privately, that Executors could kill with their bare hands,
if a sufficient formal declaration of Judgment was attested by a
Judge.

An irrational Executor was dangerous, akin to a gun whose
safety was faulty.

(This was also a rather major turn-off, but Nicole
quietly picked up the mental sub-module that had suddenly
brought that topic up, dragged it into a dark alleyway,
and shot it.  Twice.  Just to make sure.  Right now she
needed to survive and stay sane more than she needed to
find a potential primary partner.  Or even a secondary
one.)

The problem was starting with a desired result, and then
searching for evidence to support it or disconfirm it.
Human beings, sadly, were biased to consistently overvalue
the things they already thought they 'owned': ownership
bias, where a thing owned was considered more valuable
than other things, even though to a neutral observer they
might have equal or even lesser value.  And a thought that
you had already written on the bottom line was a thought
that you owned, far more precious than any other competing
thought that would be offered to you as replacement.

There was a reason why, when Nicole had been trained to perform
the ritual of changing one's mind, the mental tools given to her
were inscribed with words like "Let your belief go: if it returns
then it was true, if not, then it never should have been yours to
begin with".  And words like "Expect nothing from the evidence:
take no sides and be neutral".  And words like "Do not be
motivated to move or stay anywhere: let the winds of evidence
blow you where you should be".

Such tools were desperately needed, in order to dislodge a
thought from the clutching possessive grasp of a merely
Human brain.

Writing the bottom line first made it far too difficult to
cross it out and replace it with the real, correct
conclusion.  Far easier for a flawed Human brain to simply
ignore the evidence against it, to protect the belief that
was already written and could not be undone.  Writing the
bottom line first was a sin against rationality.

But an even worse sin against rationality was to assign any
thought the probability of 1.0.

Assign a probability of 0.9.  Or 0.99.  Or 0.999.  Or
0.9999.  That was allowed, if you truly had prior evidence
suggesting such a high degree of certainty.

But never 1.0.

Because of the way the mind worked - as a ridiculously simplified
approximation of basic Bayesian analysis - any such probability,
used as a prior belief for further thinking, would never get
updated, not normally.  It would forever remain stuck at 1.0,
unless a supreme effort was made to remove it.

The Senseis taught that an idea - any idea - was worthwhile if,
and only if, you could be persuaded to think otherwise.

And if you had an idea that you had written on the bottom line
before you had written the intervening steps from the premises,
any idea to which you had indelibly assigned the probability
1.0 - infinite certainty - then you could not be persuaded to
think otherwise.  If a retina could be called 'blind' if its
output did not change based on whether a photon (a piece of
evidence entangled from the real world) hit it or not, then a
brain could be similarly called 'blind' if its conclusion did
not change based on whether a piece of evidence entangled
from the real world was fed into it or not.

What Michael had effectively done, in claiming that no evidence
would convince him to support the proposal instead, was to admit
that he was blinded.

In a world of the blind, how could a seeing person pass the gift
of sight?

By shutting up and doing the impossible, it seemed.  The Senseis
had succeeded in doing so, and the people they had taught had
been mostly pre-rational.  Nicole might right now be just one
rationalist, but Michael would have at least the basic
rationality training.  She knew that the Senseis had managed
to force sightedness - rationality - on the world; she was
living in a universe that had resulted from the rise of the
Senseis and the Helvetian War.  It should be possible for her
to find a way to make Michael more rational, and accept
Raphael's proposal.

Michael smirked.  "Yes, Judge," he said.  "I know perfectly
well what it means: it means that I know I'm right!"

So how could Nicole force Michael back into rationality?  He
seemed more motivated than Katja had been, earlier - so it
was likely that tricks using the Dark Arts would not work.

First, Nicole had to understand what was going on inside
Michael's mind.  Next... well, she still didn't know, the
overall goal was still "impossible" in the "I don't see
any way to do that" sense.  So: first figure out what was
going on inside Michael's mind, and then figure out what to
do next.

And the wrong way to do that would be to try to imagine what
was going on inside Michael's mind.

Human brains were huge, complicated neural networks whose
state at each moment shifted and changed in chaotic ways.
When the rise of intelligence occurred, Human beings had to
evolve ways of modeling other Human brains.

The method that evolution had stumbled into involved
modifying some simple basic assumptions of the brain, and
then running the brain-function for a few seconds:
imagination.

The problem was that the few modified basic assumptions
were often not enough to properly model another Human's
brain.  Affect - the current mood or emotion gripping a
Human brain - was not easily modified to match another
person's, but often had an tremendous effect on the final
decisions thought by a Human brain.  No doubt
Neurological or Sociological Scientists could name even
more things that could change the final decision.

How to scout the territory so that she could write an
accurate map?

"What are you thinking, Michael?" said Nicole.  "Because
to reach a conclusion already, without all of us
discussing the topic fully, means that you have information
relevant to the topic that you haven't given us yet.  And
I'll be strict here: do not simply repeat what you said
earlier.  Everyone has already heard that in the earlier
stage, and not everyone is convinced that this shows
high evidence of Raphael being the saboteur.  So there is
some evidence that you haven't given."

She looked at Michael piercingly; another Dark Art kept
in reserve, now spent - she hoped more would not become
necessary soon, modern rational Humans tended to pick up
on Dark Art usage quite quickly, and got easily
desensitized to them as a result.

"You refuse to consider the possibility that you are
wrong," said Nicole.  "I am rational.  I will consider
the possibility that I, yes I, am wrong.  There is
evidence that will convince me of the wrongness of my
position: show me that you have some evidence that you
have not already shown, and I will begin to
reconsider.  For now, my current position is: Raphael is
quite right in proposing the modified procedure.
Present me with evidence that Raphael is the saboteur -
evidence that you have not shown me before - and I will
back off and reconsider my position.  I, Nicole Angel,
of vocation Judge, solemnly proclaim: I defy the data!"


Chapter 35

Adams shook his head as he finished the chapter.
Verrens, however, was still leafing through the
chapter.

When Verrens finished, Adams was smiling at him.

"Well, my young Judge," said Adams, "I hope you have
not suddenly lost your ability to speed read?"

"No, Judge," said Verrens.  "I simply read this
chapter twice.  But I confess I cannot find any
evidence regarding how the characters are now in a
lifeboat on some nameless ocean, when I am very sure
that the planetary drop pod did not in fact fail."

"As to that," said Adams, "the clues are few and far
between.  But in any case, the procedure is to discuss
the chapter, and if you have not found any clues in
this chapter for the puzzle I gave, then what is your
reaction or opinion on the chapter itself?"

"It seems to me," said Verrens, "that this chapter
brings together some of the earlier ideas presented.
The mental tools that are taught to us in the
intermediate rationality training, used in the ritual
of changing one's mind, or 'crisis of faith' as some
older rationalists preferred to term it -"

"Ah -" said Adams.  "Never mind.  Do go on."

"- as well as the classic 'I defy the data' which
modern Humans use both as a challenge, and as a
precommitment to change their mind in the face of
new evidence."

"Any further observations?" said Adams.

"None," said Verrens, "except that it seems that
Nicole's 'do the impossible' is going much better
than mine."

Adams shrugged.  "For sufficiently impossible
things," he said, "it is often very difficult to
estimate the time frame that would be needed.
And the steps involved are often not necessarily
the most straightforward ones: sometimes a step
away from the goal is needed in order to find the
true path.  In any case, is that all?"

"Yes," said Verrens.


Chapter 36

"Call it my intuition, then," said Michael.
"It's obvious, isn't it?  Look: even now
our good accountant-cum-Administrator
is not even attempting to defend himself.
If that's not an out-and-out admission of
his guilt, then what is, Judge?"

Nicole could feel the ground sinking
beneath her feet.  It was interesting, just
how much irrationality a short blast of
words could contain.  Doing the
impossible was turning out to be, well,
extremely difficult.

Oh, the audacious irrationality of it -

"Intuition" was nothing more than the
result of the inner, subconscious workings
of a standard-issue Human brain.  Inner
cores that even today, Neurology Science
had not completed mapped out.  And if the
inner workings were unseen, invisible, and
unmapped, there was always the question
of how reliable the output of "intuition"
could be.

As a future Judge, Nicole had been trained
to treat her intuitions as nothing more
than suggestions on where to start, and
to use more deliberative forms of thinking
to determine where she should get to.
At least those deliberative thinking patterns
could be expressed and described, its
patterns studied and analyzed by Senseis
all over Humanity's inhabited space for
generations now.  Trusting intuitions was
not something that her fellow Judges
would condone, if they were able to see
her now via Sousveillance.

Intuition was a black box whose contents
were unknown, and which had been
repeatedly found by Sociology Scientists
as extremely faulty.  It was not something
that a rational modern Human would use as
the entire basis for any decision.

But a worse problem was the word
"obvious".  It was evidence of one of
the nastiest, most pervasive biases:
hindsight bias.

Many of the Scientific discoveries that
underlay the rise of the Senseis were
started soon after an ancient war, known
today only as "World War Two".

In those days, a distinction had to be
made between those who were
well-educated and those who were less
educated.

As a test, one early scientist (at that
time their title was not yet capitalized,
as this occurred only during the rise of the
Senseis and triggering of the Helvetian
War) gave an analysis saying that
"soldiers (an archaic term for Executor)
from well-educated backgrounds were
more likely to be affected by Shell
Shock (an archaic term for
combat-related post-traumatic stress
disorder) than soldiers from less educated
backgrounds, due to the intellectuals
being less prepared for battle stresses
than street-smart people."

The fascinating thing was that people
who read that analysis had agreed,
quite heartily.  In fact, many of them
thought that it was "obvious."

The same scientist also gave another
analysis, this time saying that "soldiers
from less-educated backgrounds were
more likely to be affected by Shell Shock
than soldiers from well-educated
backgrounds, due to the intellectuals
having generally greater intelligence to
resist battle stresses."

And the even more fascinating thing
was that people who read the second
analysis (but not the first) had also
agreed with it quite heartily, again
claiming that it was "obvious".

At this point, it no longer mattered
which one was true: what mattered was
how people were so easily gulled into
thinking that a confident-sounding
statement from an authority was
"obvious".

(Nicole herself could not remember
which one was actually correct
out-of-hand; she hoped she could
remember to research it later when
they were rescued.  All she could
remember was that one of the two
had been true, and right now she
truly could say that it was really,
really terribly non-obvious which
one was.)

In the intermediate training, there had
been a short game designed to bring
hindsight bias into stark relief.

The class had been divided into two.
Then one half had been shown what
was supposedly an experimental
result making a particular claim, written
in an authoritative manner.  The other
half was shown an experimental result
making the opposite claim.  Both
halves were asked to write down
either the statement "This is obvious"
or "This is not obvious" and sign it.
Then the entire class would bet an
amount of money given to them in a
decision/prediction market.

In Nicole's half of the class, she had
seen the statement "Sociology
Scientists have found that, when
Humans choose friends or romantic
primary or secondary partners,
Humans tend to be more attracted
to people with traits opposite their
own: 'opposites attract,' as the
ancient saying goes."

Nicole remembered it well, because
she had signed "This is obvious," and
went on to bet against the actual
true statement: "Sociology Scientists
have found that, when Humans
choose friends or romantic primary
or secondary partners, Humans
tend to be more attracted to
people with traits similar to their own:
'birds of a feather flock together,' as
the ancient saying goes."

And that was not the nasty part of the
game.

The nasty part was that the
Deepy market had settled to
around 0.51 credits per share
(re-weighted relatively as it was a
paired-share market) of the true
statement, meaning that the class
as a whole gave the true statement
only 51% chance of being correct.
It was the hindsight bias talking,
their Sensei had said.

Nicole would be willing to bet at
three to one against that, had
Raphael not backed off from the
discussion due to the moral hazard,
Michael would have instead claimed
that Raphael was still actively
trying to mislead the community.

This was all due to writing the
conclusion before even beginning to
think: writing the bottom line.  It
was a failure mode that a rationalist
needed to completely avoid, because
getting out of that failure mode
bordered on the impossible.

Wait -

- getting out of that failure mode
bordered on the impossible.  But it
was a failure mode that Senseis had
worked against, long before, and one
of their solutions had been the ritual
of changing one's mind, as well as the
mental tools they armed you with to
prepare yourself in that ritual.

"Michael," she said, "Your brain does
not, in fact, know this for certain.
Do not propose solutions immediately,
because it unnecessarily privileges the
hypothesis!"

"I am not proposing solutions immediately,
Judge," Michael said.  "I am rational, just
like you, and I went through the
intermediate rationality course as part of
my Executor training.  This is not something
that I just thought up in five seconds!"

Well, that tool didn't work too well.  If
anything, it just made things worse.  Now
Michael was appealing to authority: he was,
after all, trained in rationality too, and
thus could think equally well with Nicole.
Never mind that Aumann's Agreement should
have forced them to agreement, if the issue
had truly been discussed thoroughly.  But
the issue was not yet discussed thoroughly,
and if had not been discussed thoroughly,
then Michael had no right to fix his
conclusion.

Half a rationalist was not half as rational
as a full rationalist, just like half a
kitten was not half as cute as a whole
kitten, it was just a horrible bloody mess.

Then Nicole thought, "Attack the weak points
of your belief..."

During her recent ritual of changing her
mind, she had considered the possibility
that Raphael was a saboteur.  But with some
amount of thinking, she had found tremendous
weaknesses in that possibility, which was
why she now rejected it.

So she prepared to fashion the thought into
a tool to pierce irrationality.


Chapter 37

"Well, Judge Verrens?" said Adams.

"No clues, it seems, Judge Adams," said Verrens.

"I mean," said Adams, "what do you think of the
novel's chapter?"

"Ah," said Verrens.  He paused to gather his
thoughts.  "For a long time, Humanity has taken
its intuition to be the ultimate and highest
form of thinking.  It was only with the rise of
the Senseis and the formalization of methods of
thinking, in the techniques of rationaliy, that
Humanity has acquired the capability to think
better than its intuitions could."

"Correct," said Adams.  "And the main advantage
of rational thought is?"

"It is openly understandable, Sensei!" said
Verrens.

Adams continued to look at him expectantly.

"It is not a mysterious operation, Judge," said
Verrens.  "Unlike intuition.  The formalized
methods of thinking are also provably more
accurate in many real-world tasks than mere
Human intuition, no matter how well-trained.
And because the techniques of rationality are
non-mysterious, we can think of further ways to
improve them."

"Yes," said Adams.  "Intuition's mystery has
always been overrated by many thinkers in
Human history.  It is only our civilization
which has started to actually demystify
intuition.  I remember, just before the rise of
the Senseis, according to my research, there was
one rather surprising - at that time - result of
Scientific study.  Specifically, they found that
simple mathematical models could outpredict the
predictions of what then passed for Economist
experts.  At that time, most of those so-called
'Economists' - today's Economists tend to take
pride in their rather complete break with their
past, incidentally - anyway, the 'Economists' of
old did ascribe to even more complex
mathematical models, but did not often actually
compute their predictions based on the models;
and even if they did, they often adjusted it
afterwards based on their intuitions.  It is not
to say that the simple models were more correct
than the common, complex mathematical models of
that time - they were often worse - simply that
the complexity was too much for their
undertrained pre-rational minds, which settled
on easier questions."

"I see, Judge," said Verrens.  "I suppose that
many of those pre-rational 'Economists' also
succumbed to hindsight bias, claiming that
their complex models, plus their intuitions,
would have predicted actual market results."

"That is correct," said Adams.  "However...
in the advanced levels of rationality
training, there is a generalized principle
called the substitution principle.  Before I
explain it, could you first expound on the 
dual process theory?"

"Certainly, Judge," said Verrens.  "The
later modified dual process theory for
reasoning classifies brain sub-modules into
either System 1 processes or System 2
processes.  In general - although exceptions
exist - System 1 process sub-modules are
fast systems over which little direct control
is possible, while System 2 process
sub-modules are slower systems which are
generally associated with conscious oversight
or control.  With training - especially with
rational vocational training in our
civilization - System 2 processes can be made
to operate as fast as, or faster than,
System 1 processes.  Further, explicit
training can usually train the
more-accessible System 2 processes more
easily than System 1 processes, although
progress has been made in techniques to train
System 1 processes."

"Good," said Adams.  "Now, the substitution
principle is the principle that many biases
in standard Human brains are specific
examples of a more general flaw: replacing a
complicated question that requires explicit
System 2 reasoning with a far simpler
question that the System 1 processes can
actually answer.  This is relevant to our
novel since it appears to me that Michael
and Katja are replacing the complicated
question 'Is Raphael the saboteur?' with the
far simpler question 'Do I like Raphael?'."

"Ah," said Verrens.

A while later, Verrens said, "Ah," again.
This time he sustained the syllable longer.

"So," said Adams, "I have now proposed a
possible reason for why Michael insists on
labelling Raphael the saboteur, and why
Katja would at least silently support him.
However - if we were to put ourselves in
Nicole's shoes - this knowledge is still
not all that useful, since it is still not
obvious to me how she could do the
'impossible' task of changing someone
else's mind.  How about you, Judge?"

Verrens thought about this for a while.


Chapter 38

"- haven't considered the sheer unlikelihood," said Nicole,
"of our premise: that the failure of the planetary drop pod
was in fact sabotage.  Fine, let us grant that, even though
most failures can often be traced back to some person making
a mistake rather than a deliberate choice to destroy.  Now
you wish to assign, among the 60 or so passengers, the 8 or
so cabin crew, and who-knows-how-many bridge crew, the label
saboteur specifically to one exact person.  And that is
assuming the sabotage cannot be done remotely, or that it
cannot be done beforehand, with the saboteurs not even on
the planetary drop pod in the first place, much less on this
boat.  And you postulate that the reason that Raphael jumped
off the boat earlier is because, not only Raphael is the
saboteur, but he is also the member of some organization,
specifically one that is powerful and influential enough to
put its own rescue operations faster than the local
government.  Never mind that most cases of sabotage in
peacetime are not from such large and influential
organizations, but are usually committed by disgruntled
employees against their employers or former employers -"

Nicole paused for breath just a little too long.

"But what you didn't consider," said Michael, "is that an
organization large enough and influential enough will be
able to cover up anything!"

Well, running out of breath wasn't so bad after all,
because now Nicole could see that she had managed to lead
her prey into the spot she had designated.

She hoped her sharpest weapon would kill the irrationality,
because she would probably not be able to sharpen a new one
soon.  Doing the impossible was really, really hard.

She breathed deeply, partly to bring more oxygen into her
bloodstream, partly to bring her brain into a sane,
rational, deliberative state.

"Tell me what you think will happen, Executor," she said.
"If we ensure that Raphael remains in this boat - if we
bind him - and then we are rescued -"

"They'll just pretend to be the real government rescue
operations!" said Michael.  "And none of us will be the
wiser!  But I will know!  I will know, even if you try
to deny the truth!"

"I haven't even asked a question, Executor," said Nicole.
"So tell me: you anticipate that we will be rescued by a
group of people who will act and move in ways that we
will be unable to distinguish from the rescue operation?"

"Yes!" said Michael.  "They want to commit the perfect
crime!"

"So that won't be a good experiment to determine if
Raphael is the saboteur, then," said Nicole.  "What
about if we exile Raphael?  What do you anticipate
will happen, Michael?"

"Raphael will just swim off and be rescued by his
organization," said Michael.

"And if we exile him and then later discover that his
drowned body was found by rescuers?" said Nicole.

"It'll be a fake corpse, of course!  Just a brainless
body clone, I'm sure they'll decapitate the head to make
it appear that sharks scavenged it!"

"And if the head is intact and identifiable, and autopsy
reveals a brain?"

"Then they killed Raphael to make us think that he was
really innocent," said Michael.  "They want to cast doubt
in our minds."

"And suppose that the ship which picks us up also later
picks up Raphael alive?"

"Then that means the ship is really controlled by his
organization."

"Suppose," said Nicole, "that we bind or tie up Raphael,
and when the rescue ship shows up, we tell them to let us
all go safely or we'll kill Raphael?"

"They'll just call in a negotiators, and try to convince
us that we're insane and that we should let Raphael go
because there really was not sabotage!"

"I see," said Nicole.  "Strange, then, that you are able
to anticipate everything that would show that Raphael is
actually innocent, and then provide an excuse that still
allows you to conclude that Raphael really, really is
the saboteur.  You're right: no amount of evidence will
change your mind."

"They are not excuses, they're just common sense!" said
Michael.

"No, you're not using common sense," Nicole said.
"You're using belief-in-belief."

She hoped that this weapon would pierce Michael's
irrationality.  It was likely that he was an Executor -
you don't get that well-muscled physique easily, his
knowledge of proper protocol regarding Executors acting
under the orders of a Judge was additional evidence -
and if he was an Executor, then he was likely to have
been given the intermediate rationality training, which
included the concept of belief-in-belief.

Looking at Michael's face, she thought that her weapon
had hit true.  Had it hit deep?  Was the irrationality
being pushed aside by some remnant of sanity inside
Michael's trained brain?

She prepared to think of another plan while waiting as
Michael tried to stave off his shock at the sudden
attack -

- she still hadn't been able to do so, but anyway,
Michael was now (hopefully) going to be more receptive
to being led back to rationality.

"Michael," said Nicole, "beliefs must pay rent before
they are allowed to reside in your brain.  And the rent
they must pay is in constraining your anticipated
experiences."

She watched Michael, hoping that he was listening.  "In
short," she said, "if anything at all can be explained
by your belief, if what you believe cannot constrain
what you expect to see - if there is nothing at all
that would make you doubt that belief - then it -"

"- is equivalent to a null answer," said Michael,
breathing raggedly.  "Which means: my belief is
completely meaningless..."

She waited.  When he remained silent, she continued.
"You know that what you believe is wrong: given a
possible outcome that might suggest that Raphael is not
in fact the saboteur, you quickly moved to cover it.
You tried to give some explanation that will allow you
to retain the idea that Raphael is the saboteur.  At no
point did you say, 'yes, but I would bet against that
outcome occurring.'  At no point did you say, 'fine,
let's try it and see.'  At no point did you say, 'I
defy the data.'  You knew, you already knew that the
idea was wrong, because you refused to actually back
it."

"Yes," said Michael.

So, it seemed to be taking.  So Nicole said -

- was about to speak, when Michael said, "That's
exactly what you would say, to try to keep me away
from the truth.  To try to make my conviction
'meaningless.'  I should have realized earlier.  I
knew it all along.  When our eyes met on board the
pod, I knew there was something important, something
different about you.  I should have listened to my
intuition earlier.  You're with him.  You're another
saboteur."


Chapter 39

"Ah," said Adams, when he had finished.  "Escalation.
Nicole's impossible task gets more impossible.  How
about yours, Judge Verrens?"

Verrens shrugged.  "I think," he said, "that not only
do I need to level up my 'game,' so to speak, but I
need to recall more about what happened before.  You
refuse to let me re-read the earlier chapters -"

"- correct -"

"- but I doubt you can prevent me from attempting to
remember them."

"Certainly not," said Adams.  "Your brain is your
own."

"Thank you," said Verrens.  "This, I suppose, is
where I should attempt to focus: on remembering the
earlier chapters.  There seems to be something like
slightly more than a quarter of the novel left; I
suppose that the revelation of the non-failing
drop pod will be there; and so there are likely to
be few clues left.  Any clues must be in the bulk
of the book, which lies earlier."

"While at the same time," said Adams, "you must
still continue reading the novel, and giving me
your feedback.  This is, after all, the main
purpose of our current exercise, and my puzzle to
you is but a diversion."

"Yes, Lord Judge," said Verrens.

"So," said Adams, "let us further discuss the
novel itself, and leave the puzzle to your
memory -"


Chapter 40

Impossible impossible impossible impossible!

A thousand sub-modules inside Nicole's brain screamed at
the sheer unfair impossibility of the universe.

Well, this universe wasn't really fair anyway.  You were
allowed to fail, and suffer the penalty for failure.

But one tiny sub-module persisted in saying "Shut up and
do the impossible!"

Nicole consciously promoted this thought to the forefront
of her brain, and started looking for sub-modules who
could match the thought to something, anything at all.

The Sensei's lesson, discussing the concept of "Shut up
and do the impossible" - no, not useful.

A bit of gossip with some fellow Judge trainees, about
someone who had no chance but was still going to keep
trying - no, not useful.

Ah, but what about this?

In the early twenty-first century, people had started to
propose constructing self-improving artificial minds (this
had better be actually relevant, the other sub-modules in
Nicole's brain said).

Such self-improving minds, it was proposed, could quickly
acquire tremendous powers, if they were allowed to have
sufficient control over reality.  Just as Human brains had
taken over Earth and parts of space nearby, all while merely
being connected to hands and feet that were nowhere near as
strong and fast as the limbs of many lesser animals.  Give
a sufficiently smart Human brain merely a single finger to
move, and it would be more than enough to pierce the
secrets of space and time.  Give an even smarter,
self-improving artificial brain that same finger, and it
might very well take over nearby parts of reality.

Give any sufficiently smart brain even a small lever - and
what was a finger but a lever? - and it would find ways to
build larger and larger levers, until it finally had a lever
long enough to move the universe...

And so those primitive, barely proto-rational people
thought that they could confine such an artificial mind
inside a computer (an act, Nicole knew, which was in this
current, more enlightened age, illegal).  And the only way
to interact with this artificial mind would be via a simple
two-way text terminal.  In no way, shape, or form, would
such a mind be allowed access to the physical world.

The monumental stupidity of this idea might have never been
discovered in time.

But one of them realized that levers did not have to be
physical levers.  After all, the term "leverage" did not
often get applied to merely physical levers - it was often
applied to money (Nicole would have to ask Raphael for
details at a later, more propitious time; she really didn't
understand that very well.  She also had to really clamp
down on these digressions, they were wasting her time, she
needed to interact with the community Real Soon Now or she
could lose all credibility together with Raphael).

And money was a social construct, defined by a community of
interacting Human brains.

And then it clicked inside the brain of that person that
the Human brain interacting via a mere two-way text terminal
was itself something that could be used as a lever.  Not a
physical lever, but a lever nonetheless.

Once that person had convinced himself (or was it herself?
Never mind) that such a trapped brain could be able to use
the Human guarding it as a lever to begin interacting with
the real world, he set himself the task of convincing
others that it was unsafe, and that they had to actually
build safety into the artificial brain, so that it would
never want to completely destroy Humanity in trying to
achieve any of its goals.

The other thinkers, however, refused to believe him.  Just
as now, Michael completely refused to believe her.

Ah, so that was the point.  So, how did he manage to convince
others that artificial brains had to be done safely, or not
at all?

He had wagered that, if he - an ordinary Human brain, not
even the self-improving artificial type they were
considering - were put inside a locked room with only a
two-way terminal, and that the other end of the terminal
would be used by another Human being who could unlock the
room and let him free, then he would be able to convince
the gatekeeper to let him go.

And he had actually won that wager a few times.

How?

Nicole could not remember the exact details.  But something
from one of his writings did stick to her memory: "The key
is to realize that you are talking to a Human.  You won't
be able to escape the locked room if you were talking to a
rock."

All right.  So right now, Michael was irrational and would
not listen to reason.  But he was still Human.  Baseline
untrained pre-rational Humans were irrational, but that
did not mean that they could not be depended upon to form
particular conclusions.  In fact, they could be relied upon
to predictably make certain irrational conclusions.

Humans evolved as social animals.  And now a part of Nicole
suggested something to do right now, before it was too
late - Michael was starting to look triumphant, a look of
horror was starting to creep up Julia's face, Katja seemed
to grow more and more certain -

- Nicole laughed at the inanity of Michael's suggestion.
She, a candidate to become Judge, sabotaging the planetary
drop pod?  What absurdity!  Nicole laughed, it was an
infectious laugh, and Julia laughed along with her after a
while.  Raphael even smiled, even though he was trying to
stoically remain aloof the discussion due to the moral
hazard of participating in it.  Katja looked even more
uncertain, and Michael, looking around at the community,
seemed to be rethinking his recent conclusions -

Okay, the laugh had sounded a little forced to her own ears,
and the timing was just slightly late by her own estimation,
but she seemed to have gotten at least some of the results
she wanted.  Hey, give her a break, her brain told her.  It's
not like she was a detached Platonic ideal mind that could
cogitate in zero time.  Besides, she managed to get the
community to doubt Michael's latest statement, and that,
hopefully, would allow her to keep the fight going.  If Katja
and Julia had doubted her then and there, then it really
would have been absolutely impossible.

Humans were social animals, and laughter was a social
event. It could be used to signal many different things.
Such as  contempt, for instance.  That signaling still
worked, regardless of whether a Human was being rational or
irrational, so long as he or she remained sufficiently Human.
The basic infectiousness of laughter - based on built-in
social conformity circuits of the human brain - could be
exploited, as Nicole just did.  Leveraging her control over
herself into control over the community, and from there
control over Michael.  Give her a lever long enough...

What next?

Another sub-module provided another idea.

It was not a good idea.  It was an embarrassing thing to do.
Hadn't she shot that sub-module, twice?  What was it doing
still going around in her brain making suggestions?

No, she couldn't do it, it was too demeaning, she'd lose all
her self-respect if she did that.

Basically, the idea was based on the observation that Michael
was not only definitely Human, but was also very very likely
to be a Human male - no stop that right now I'm not going to
think it.

Okay, fine.  But what was it that Judge Nicole Adams needed
to do?  What were values, her goals?  What was the thing she
needed to protect, and thus use her every ounce of
rationality for?

The morality of her tiny community.  The aggregate sanity of
the people on this boat.  Raphael, who was very likely
innocent, given the evidence she currently had.

If a miscarriage of justice occurred while a Judge stood by,
what was the point of all her studying for her vocation?

What was the loss of a little self-respect, compared to
that?  Heck, she was on Earth for the Judgement Acceptance
Examination, she was almost sure that she would pass, even if
this adventure on Earth's ocean made her miss she was sure
they'd give her a special examination session, and anyway
becoming an actual Judge would give her a whole lot of
self-respect (and other people's respect too, come to think
of it), more than enough to counterbalance what self-respect
she would lose now.

Shut up and multiply.  A little sacrifice on your part versus
the very sanity of the community and justice for Raphael.

Okay, that sub-module did have a point.  She just hoped that
some other sub-module would make a better suggestion.

After all, if she could get the same, or nearly the same,
result, for a much lower price, she should take that trade
instead of this - idiotic idea.

If there was a better deal than this, and if she could find
them soon - Julia's laughter was dying away, Raphael's
stoicism was returning, and Michael was spluttering,
thinking up a reply -

She asked for other options from her other mental
sub-modules -


Chapter 41

"Ah," said Adams, "an interesting imagery, levers.  Well,
Judge Verrens?  Verrens?"

Verrens snapped back to attention.  "Sorry, Lord Judge,"
he said.  "You were speaking about levers?"

"Yes," said Adams.  "Rationality, we might say, is a lever.
Or to be more precise, a set of levers of various sizes and
for various purposes."

"I follow your reasoning, Judge," said Verrens.

"Do you?" said Adams.  "Tell me: if a machine were designed
that made only levers, and consumed the entire Earth to
make those levers - would that machine be useful?"

"No, Judge," said Verrens.  "Ah - now I see what you mean.
Rationality must be used for something other than to serve
itself.  Hence, the reason why every Human being is
trained in the basic rationality course, but no one is
compelled to take the intermediate course, except for
certain vocations like ours, and why only Senseis and
amateur Senseis are allowed to take the advanced course."

"Correct," said Adams.  "We still need a machine to make
levers, and that is why we have a separate vocation for
rationality tutors - the Senseis.  But such a machine
should not consume the entire resources of all Humanity,
for then what would be the point?  Even so, such a machine
must still exist, because otherwise, how would we make
more levers when needed?"

"And to continue the analogy," said Verrens, "most people's
vocations would not require anything more than the basic
rationality course - the ability to recognize that one has
made a mistake, to reflect on the thought process that has
led one to make the mistake, to know that the mind contains
a map of reality, but not reality itself.  Some vocations,
like Judge, Executor, and Scientist, need the deeper and
more complete training, since these vocations require more
heavy mental lifting, and thus bigger levers.  But the
biggest levers of all are reserved to the Senseis, who must
make the levers to be used by the other vocations."

"And," said Adams, "to design even larger and larger
levers, just in case Humanity may need them some day."

"So the analogy certainly seems quite apt, Judge," said
Verrens.

"Yes," said Adams.  "In my research of the Sensei's past,
there was a rather interesting fact - the early Senseis had
a rule that they seem to have dropped in the modern era.
Specifically, a Sensei had to have some other vocation than
being a Sensei - that is, they would all have to be amateur
rather than vocational Senseis.  Did you know this, Judge?"

"No," said Verrens.  "That seems rather irresponsible; I
imagine the pre-rational and proto-rational eras would need
more full-time Senseis."

"They did have a reason for doing it that way," said Adams.
"Would you venture a guess what it was?  This is not another
puzzle, by the way; I will give the correct answer if you
cannot find it immediately."

Verrens smiled.  "Let me think about it for a while, Judge."

After about a minute, Verrens said, "I suppose that the
pre-rational hierarchicalists, and possibly the
proto-rational groups, were opposed to the early Senseis,
and that the vocations the Senseis claimed were their cover
and protection.  Their secret identity, I suppose."

Adams shook his head.  "No," he said.  "The reason given was
that, in those early days, there was no easy way to determine
if what any particular Sensei taught was actually rational,
or only appeared to be so.  Judging rationality at that time
was not as well honed as today, where Neurology Scientists
and Sociology Scientists perform such tests almost as a minor
hobby or amateur work.  Remember, rationality must serve
something other than itself.  In the early pre-rational and
proto-rational era, the few people who knew rationality were
also the ones who were developing it.  And one way they had to
judge the effectiveness of their developed rationality
techniques was to actually try them in their actual day-time
vocations.  Hence the early rule that every Sensei must be an
amateur Sensei, not a vocational one: they did not want
schools of rationality to proliferate without evidence backing
their teachings."

Adams looked at Verrens straight in the eyes, an evil grin
lurking somewhere off the edge of his face.  "Now, earlier you
seemed to be distracted.  Tell me, Judge Verrens, did you find
a clue in this chapter?"

"Yes," said Verrens.  "Strangely enough, I think I did.  But
for now I will turn the tables against you: I will not tell
you, yet, what the clue I found is."  He grinned back at
Adams.

Adams shrugged.  "Well, then," he said.  "Let us proceed to the
next chapter."


Chapter 42

If this worked, she was going to pass the Judgment
Acceptance Examinations and then drink some kind
of extremely potent alcoholic beverage to expunge her
memory.

If it didn't - she wouldn't know what to do.  Lose,
maybe?  She hadn't managed to come up with some
other idea, and she needed to act Real Soon Now, the
window for actually acting was going to close as soon
as Michael unspluttered himself and started to actually
talk.

So she started to plan out a little what exactly she
would say -

- As the laughter subsided, Nicole looked down.  She
whispered, her voice low and wistful, "You know, when
our eyes met on board the drop pod, I thought there
was something important, something different about
you, too.  I thought you were an attractive man.  I
wished, just a little bit, that..." Her voice trailed
off into silence -

Basically, the idea was based on the observation that
Michael was not only definitely Human, but was also
very very likely to be a Human male, whose brain was
preprogrammed to trigger on particular cues.  It was
thus very very likely to respond to beings who looked
like attractive young female Humans, and to respond in
particular ways.  Rationality training would have
allowed him to override such responses easily, but he
had deliberately avoided those techniques in order to
allow himself to retain an irrational idea.

Michael was currently not a rational Human being.  So
she could exploit that to her advantage.  She hoped.

So, feeling the distaste in her mouth, she plowed
onward -

- and then her eyes turned into slits focused on
Michael.  "But that was then," she said, voice hard,
and yet tinged with sadness and loss.  "Now you not
only persist in an irrational belief, you also
reject the use of rationality techniques that would
correct it.  Now you accuse me of being a saboteur,
someone who cannot be trusted.  Me, someone who is
almost a full, vocational Judge, but for the formality
of an examination.  And I had hoped that you might be
more than just an attractive man I glanced briefly at
once, on some random planetary drop pod."  She looked
out, glancing over the sea, brushing away a thread of
hair, and sighed -

Looking away meant that it would be difficult to
gauge what was happening to him - and if he
persisted in irrationality he could break down
badly - but hopefully some self-preservative
instinct would force him to take up rationality
techniques again.

Hopefully being forced to apply rationality
techniques in order to handle this rather low,
below-the-belt (literally?) blow, would also cause
him to apply those techniques to his cherished
belief in the guilt of Raphael -

- "I'm sorry," he said, his voice wracked by
emotion.  "I'm so sorry..."  Peeking from a corner
of her eyes she saw that Michael's eyebrows were
knotted, his eyes focused on something that neither
she, nor anyone else on the boat, could see;
perhaps it was some rationality technique operating
in his mind (she hoped).  "You're right," he said,
his voice calmer now, the wracked emotion fading.
"I've not been thinking clearly for a while now,"
he said -

Winning in spite of desperate odds should have felt
good.  It didn't.

The important thing was to win.  Rationality was a
tool to use for winning.  To win was to achieve her
goals and preserve what she valued: stop the
miscarriage of justice that would occur if Raphael
was wrongly convicted on the very light evidence
available, bring Katja and Michael into more sane
states of mind, conclude the discussion so that
Administrator Yu could take over once the moral
hazard that prevented him from acting was gone.

Her self-respect was also something she valued, but
she did not value it as much as the others, and so
she had been willing to sacrifice it.  A Pyrrhic
victory, almost.  Her basic brain told her so; but
her total aggregate rationality-trained brain knew
about ownership bias, knew that she valued her own
self-respect higher than it was actually worth, and
she had needed to explicitly compensate against it.
So, it was not a Pyrrhic victory, all things
considered, just nearly so.

So she told herself, but it was still somewhat
difficult for her to accept.


Chapter 43

"I hope," said Adams, "that you are able to direct your
full attention, now, to our discussion of the novel."

"Yes, Lord Judge," said Verrens.  "Since I think that I
have managed to extract a minor clue from the previous
chapter - although not enough, I think, to consider the
puzzle fully solved.  And in any case, I am still
waiting for the moral problem you mentioned earlier as
a hint; once it has arrived, then I shall be able to
judge the actual circumstances and then I can consider
whether my tentative hypothesis was correct."

Adams smiled.  "And will you tell me your hypothesis
now?" he asked.

"Of course not," said Verrens, "since you are a
garrulous old trickster of a Judge, pulling your rank on
some poor unranked Judge just for your amusement."

They both chuckled at this.

"Fine, then," said Adams.  "I suppose you will tell me
your hypothesis anyway, when the moral problem that is
arriving soon actually arrives - whether or not your
hypothesis is confirmed or disconfirmed?"

"Yes," said Verrens.

"Then let us return to the novel," said Adams.  "What
can you say about the current chapter?"

"Aside from the obvious fact that Nicole won," said
Verrens, "and that she is now regretting, to some
extent, the price she paid for that victory, there
seems little to remark upon, Judge."

"Then let me ask a hypothetical, Judge," said Adams.
"Suppose that, now that she appears to have
successfully defended Raphael from the accusation of
sabotage, afterward they encounter further evidence
that points to Raphael.  What then?"

"Then the community as a whole updates their
hypotheses in the light of new evidence," said
Verrens.  "As we should expect from anyone who has
completed the basic rationality training, who in the
modern era is practically every adult Human being in
modern civilization."

"But recall, Judge," said Adams, "that the characters
are, in fact, barely within the bounds of modern
civilization, and that we have evidence that the
rationality training they have is now extremely
strained by the circumstances.  In fact, they are
likely to fall back to more primitive thinking
methods: that Nicole was completely wrong in defending
Raphael in the first place, notwithstanding the fact
that, at the time she defended him, there was too
little evidence pointing to Raphael.  Rather than all
of them calmly integrating the new evidence into
their working hypotheses, the majority, I think,
would contrive to strip Nicole of social influence in
their community, because of an action that was
justifiable given the knowledge they had at the time
it was committed."

"Ah," said Verrens.  "I suppose you are correct,
Judge.  Although I would think that such a situation
seems contrived, and could only occur within a
fictional novel."

"Do not be so confident, my young Judge!" said Adams.
"I have mentioned before that the novel may be said
to be true, in a way.  You can be sure that the
designer of the plot has placed the characters in a
situation in such a way that this could actually
happen.  As I mentioned before, the techniques of
rationality are recent, barely more than a century
and a half or so; evolution, blind and stupid though
it may be, has the advantage of wreaking millions of
years' worth of badly-guided design on our Human
brains.  Reality is always stranger, to our merely
Human intuitions, than fiction, since fiction is
molded specifically to suit Human tastes."

"Ah," said Verrens.  "I see.  But the novel is
intended to be a sort of trainer for student Judges,
is it not, Lord Judge?  Do you suppose that this
situation is something that a typical Judge would
find himself or herself in?"

Adams paused.

He nodded sagely.  "Well," said Adams, "I suppose,
then, that this is a weakness that you have found
with the novel.  Its premise is that an aspiring
Judge finds herself, not among sane rational people,
but instead in a highly stressful situation together
with people who are, because of the situation,
sometimes not in a rational state, and dependent more
on pre-rational modes of thought.  In practice, such
a situation would be rare and unlikely - but still,
should we or should we not present this novel, just
in case such an event does occur to one of the
student Judges in the future?"

Verrens looked carefully at Adams' face.

He sighed.  "I see, Judge," said Verrens, "that in
fact this has been considered, and no doubt minds
better than mine at these considerations have done
the requisite computations with accurately-measured
data, and considered it worth the time of a bright
old trickster of a Judge of the Fifth Rank to at
least evaluate.  After all, it would be best if a
Judge placed in the same situation is able to win,
with all his or her strength as a rationalist, even
at impossible odds.  Even though it is unlikely, it
is still not unlikely enough a possibility to
ignore."

"Yes," said Adams.  "And I suppose you have learned
that in our conversations, even as I pause, it is
not in fact because I must change my mind, but simply
because I am tricking you into thinking that I have
been less prepared than I truly am.  I hope that you
still try, though, and that you are able to surprise
me into considering something I was not able to think
of before - I certainly hope that you have not learned
helplessness!  As the Senseis teach, shut up and do
the impossible -"


Chapter 44

- and so, after successfully shutting up and doing the
impossible, Nicole felt that she deserved a break.

With Michael backing off from his previous position,
and now actually rationally thinking about the proposal,
it was pretty much inevitable that Raphael's proposal
would pass: their subsequent discussion would be limited
to answering the question "Is at least one saboteur
among the people currently on the boat?"

Nicole did not pay very much attention to the rest of the
disputation arena's synthesis stage; she doubted that she
would be able to make any decent contribution in her
current mentally drained state, anyway.  So she just let
her System 2 drift, hoping to recharge her drained
willpower before the next crisis hit (and also hoping
that this would be the last crisis).  She ended up just
listening idly, her System 1 providing automated
noncommital nods, tracking the token to where it went -

Raphael, apologizing for the weakness of the ideas he had
provided, saying "- I do hope you all understand that I
had needed to present my ideas before Julia did, so I
think it is only to be expected that they would be mostly
speculative -"

Julia, contradicting Katja's idea, saying "- a bridge crew
member would be in the best position to perform any
significant sabotage, or maybe the cabin crew, but your
idea means that a passenger saboteur had help from a
cabin crew saboteur, and strictly it's simpler to just
have the cabin crew saboteur without a passenger
saboteur.  But the simplest idea would be to have one of
the maintenance Enginers or technicians -"

Katja, commenting on one of Raphael's ideas, saying
"- just doesn't seem to be relevant, and doesn't seem to
be able to give a hint for answering the question being
discussed.  So what if the time zone is -"

Michael, basically agreeing, but for some reason (Nicole's
System 1 suggested that it was a good reason, but as her
System 2 was quite disengaged and not at all paying any
attention, she would not have bet at even odds) had
focused on another of Raphael's ideas, saying "- ships
waiting to bring the drop pod into port would be the first
to learn about the event, so it seems strange that we have
not been rescued yet -"

- everything started to blur together, and only bare
snippets, attached to voices, filtered into her resting
consciousness -

Michael: "- as Julia said, drop lifeboats are paired, so
now that I think of it, my proximity is not as much of a
mystery -"

Katja: "- still think that the wakening gas being wrong
for the sedatives offered means there was sabotage, but
then it doesn't mean the saboteur is actually -"

Julia: "- not my specialty but I would assume that basic
safety locks exist -"

Raphael: "- so I invoke my right as Administrator to
override the token passing; Julia, please pass it to
Nicole instead."

- wait, what?

Her System 1 shocked System 2 awake, warning that there
was something that needed more deliberative thinking to
handle.

Julia was profferring the token to Katja; everyone was
looking at her.

Neither Katja, Michael, nor Julia objected, so Julia
pointed the bottle of shark repellent at her direction.

Briefly, Nicole thought of objecting, but she just
shrugged it off internally and took the token instead.

She fished through recent memory, and simply let
herself ramble, generally giving the opinion that there
was probably no sabotage, and if there was indeed
sabotage, it was not likely that the saboteur or
saboteurs would be on the boat.

She passed the token on, but afterward might not have
been able to identfy who she had just passed it to.

The growing consensus was largely clear: there were no
saboteurs on the boat.  Nicole let herself cheer a little
inside.  After all, if none of the saboteurs were on the
boat, then Raphael was definitely not a saboteur, so her
little sacrifice (little? little? that was a big
sacrifice!) was not in vain after all.

Administrator Raphael Yu gave a short summary of their
community's aggregate conclusions -

- was about to give a short summary of the community's
aggregate conclusions, when Katja grabbed his wrist and
started to hit his chest repeatedly!

Nicole's System 1 triggered on the Medic's sudden
movement, assuming that such an action was an important
emergency procedure needed to save his life.  Raphael's
other arm - his left arm - was flailing, trying to block
Katja's clenched fist, so Nicole held it back to prevent
it from obstructing Katja's endeavors.

It was later, after Raphael lay limp and lifeless,
eyelids fluttering, when Nicole looked at Katja's face,
and saw eyes filled with anger and triumph.

It was later that Nicole realized that Katja was not
trying to save Raphael's life in some medical emergency
that only Katja could act upon.

It was later that Nicole realized that Katja had been
doing precisely the opposite of saving his life.


Chapter 45

"Ah," said Adams as he put away the recent chapter.
"Could you tell me, Judge Verrens, what is your conclusion
regarding the puzzle you are working on, now that it
appears that the next moral decision for Nicole has
arrived?"

"I'm sorry, Judge," said Verrens.  "I must admit that my
attention was largely grabbed by the penultimate event in
the chapter; I haven't actually managed to think through
how the event connects to the puzzle.  Could you give me a
few more seconds in which to think?"

Adams shook his head.  "Later, then.  Let us instead
discuss the chapter itself," he said.  "Can you give me
some insight or idea about the recent chapter, in light of
previous events in the story?"

"For one," said Verrens, "it would make Nicole's earlier
win - making Michael back off from his irrational
accusation of Raphael - into a distinct loss: she had
sacrificed some of her self-respect but ended up losing
what she wanted to protect despite that sacrifice.  If I
were to put myself in the character's shoes, I suppose that
I would be - extremely angry does not seem to do it
justice, but I cannot think of a better term."

"Ah, anger," said Adams.  "Anger, modulated and not allowed
to become an unthinking rage, can help focus the willpower
of an individual, and, however counterintuitively, can
improve rational thought; however, it generally makes the
individual focus on aggressive and destructive action
against others in a community: a bias towards violence that
normally does not hold in normal and rational thought.
What would you bet on happening in the next chapter,
Judge?"

"I would bet," said Verrens, "two credits against one that
Nicole will have tremendous difficulty in making a moral
Judgment on what punishment will be appropriate for Katja.
She may end up harsher than is acceptable in that
situation, especially since she knows that there are no
cameras watching her, and in particular no peer Judges
overlooking her moral decisions.  It would require her
utmost control and deepest training to maintain sanity.
Given her current state, she may snap and do something
drastic, like order Executor Michael to perform a summary
execution - according to the story she is mentally
exhausted and might not have the willpower to motivate a
System 1 override."

"You bet only on the difficulty," said Adams, "but what
would you bet her moral Judgment will be, after going
through the difficulty of making a Judgment?"

Verrens paused for a moment, thinking.  "I am not sure,
Judge," he said.  "The standard punishment to
premeditated murder is physical restraining of the
murderer and a thorough analysis by Neurological
Scientists.  Specific analyses that would normally be
considered violations of human rights will be allowed;
right of mental privacy is waived until Neurological
Scientists can determine if the individual can be
redeemed by forced amnesia of recent events followed by
Sociological therapy, or if the behavior is irredeemably
psychopathic and requires indefinite storage in an
asylum until we can find a method of curing that
pathology.  As for what Nicole will decide - I honestly
cannot determine that particular outcome, and would be
unwilling to bet on anything."

"Not even some kind of probabilistic analysis, Judge?"
said Adams.

"I fear I have too little information on murder cases
where the Judge is in significant stress while Judgment
is being made," said Verrens.  "The situation in the
novel seems quite contrived and I cannot recall any cases
at all where the Judge may not be in a state to retain
strict rationality during Judgment, and where another,
perhaps less risky Judge cannot be found.  Thus I fear I
cannot predict what will happen using even just a
probabilistic analysis."

"Suppose, instead," said Adams, "that it is you on the
boat.  Try to put yourself in Nicole's situation.
What would you yourself decide?"

"I wouldn't answer that, Lord Judge," said Verrens.
"I am not an amateur Sensei, but I did pay attention in
the intermediat rationality training course when we were
taught that standard Humans are very bad at predicting
their own behaviors, especially when attempting to
predict their behaviors in a situation where their affect
or mood is different from their affect at the time of
predicting.  While I am somewhat mentally exhausted over
reading the novel, and trying to solve your puzzle, I
suspect that my current exhaustion would not be anywhere
near the level of Nicole's exhaustion, and I will
probably be more rational than she currently is.  I would
be better off trusting a probabilistic analysis rather
than my own intuitions, and since I cannot perform a
probabilistic analysis due to complete lack of prior data,
I cannot reliably predict my own behavior."

Adams chuckled.  "That is quite correct, Judge," he
said.  "It would be best to put you in such a situation
first so that you can make a good prediction of what you
would decide.  Or at least an analogous situation."

"Yes," said Verrens.  "I hope that my training would be
able to overrule my anger and indignation at such a turn
of events."

"So would all Judges hope," said Adams.  "Do you have
further thoughts or insights about this recent chapter?"

"Well, for another," said Verrens, "I find it hard to
believe that Katja would be motivated to actually attempt
to murder Raphael.  Earlier, she seemed to have - perhaps
been more open to considering Raphael as a valuable
member of the community."

"As to that," said Adams, "they are, after all, still in a
stressful situation.  Perhaps it has forced Katja into
irrationality and, we hope temporary, psychopathy.  Any
others?"

"Finally," said Verrens, "I cannot imagine how
Katja managed to kill Raphael."

Adams shrugged.  "Neither can I," he said, "but then
neither of us are Medics.  However, I am quite confident
in the talents of the plot designer, and I would not be
surprised if that method of killing, as vaguely described
in this chapter, is indeed feasible in real life."

Neither talked for a moment.

"I am curious," said Verrens, "about how exactly Katja
managed to kill Raphael.  Can we proceed, Lord Judge?"


Chapter 46

Nicole - had disintegrated, mentally, into several thousand
sub-modules of herself, each one uncapable of accepting the
depth of what had just occurred.

One of them wailed a sarcastic echo, "impossible impossible
impossible -" over and over again.

She couldn't bring herself into a coherent whole.  No
sub-module, no sub-persona even attempted to pull the mad,
shouting chaos in her brain into some kind of ordered,
coherent thought.

But it didn't last for long.  No evolved Human brain would
do something as definitively bad for itself as to lock up in
a situation where a social ally had just been killed.

Her arm was rigid, where some deep impulse had tried to
get her to slap Katja, and some other impulse had kept he
from doing so.  She forced herself to relax her hand, asking
her various mental sub-modules to bring the debate into
conscious volition rather than by physical deadlock.

Then she realized that her entire body was tense and forced
herself to relax her entire body.

Katja was laughing giddily; Nicole realized that she had
been laughing for quite a while now.  "Physically induced
heart arrhythmia," Katja said.  "I thought it would be
impossible but I did it, now what will you do, saboteur?"
She continued giggling.

"What did you just do to Raphael!?" Nicole demanded.

"I induced heart arrhythmia!" Katja said.  "And thanks!
If you hadn't held back his hand I might have missed the
timing!  They said that was possible, you just have to
time the blow to the chest in the proper part of the
cardiac rhythm!  Cardiac contusion, that's what they
call it!  I never tried it before, and look!  I
actually got it!"

Michael was looking at her.  Waiting for Nicole's
Judgment?  Julia had moved to the boat's edge, trying to
keep as far away from Raphael's corpse, and from Katja, as
possible.

Corpse?  Not quite, not with modern technology -

"Katja," said Nicole, "brain death does not occur
immediately.  What can we do to revive him!?"

"Nothing!" said Katja.  "Try doing CPR if you wish, but
you'll need to keep doing that until you can get a
defibrillator to reestablish normal cardiac rhythm.  And
all it will do is extend the window of opportunity to
revive him!  The longer you go, the more damage to the
brain, until it's pointless and you reach brain death, so
good luck, because advanced life support is not going to
come until we're rescued, and by then it will be too
late!"

A slim chance was better than zero.  Nicole reached over,
trying to figure out how she could best position herself
to perform CPR -

- was about to reach over when Katja shoved her away from
Raphael!

"No!" said Katja.  "I won't let you!  He's the saboteur,
he just manipulated you into thinking he isn't!  He's
dangerous, he has to die!"

Nicole shoved her hard, and shouted, "Catch her,
Executor!"

Nicole's shove was strong enough to make Katja fall into
the water, and Michael immediately moved to keep her
physically restrained.

Nicole started to pump.  She wasn't sure if it was because
she was physically or mentally exhausted, but Raphael's chest
seemed unnaturally hard -

Most Human individuals found it socially unacceptable to
press their mouths against the mouths of strangers, or
even of their friends.  Even if the goal was to save
someone's life.  This irrationality was deemed too strong
to fight in an emergency situation where a person's
attention would be distracted too much to attempt overriding
instinct.  The basic Medic training that all Full Citizens
received taught hands-only CPR.  While less effective than
the full CPR set, it was far more likely to be performed.
The exact probability for survival and the probability of
the emergency procedure being attempted was computed, and
the result came out in favor of hands-only CPR.

- and several minutes later, exhausted, she gave up;
rescuers hadn't appeared in those few minutes (it was
unlikely, granted, but a tiny possibility was better than
nothing), and Raphael's brain was probably far too damaged
to rescue by now.

Katja had successfully killed Raphael.  And Nicole had been
an unwitting accomplice: she had held back Raphael's hand
from blocking Katja's fist, since she had assumed that every
Medic could not imagine taking someone else's life, and that
any speedy action by a Medic was something that needed to be
assisted, not hindered.

"Well?" shouted Katja.  "Looks like we managed to kill him,
Judge.  You and me!  You helped me kill him!  You can't
punish me without putting yourself up for punishment too!"


Chapter 47

"So, Judge," said Adams, "the method of killing certainly
appears quite implausible."

"Yes," said Verrens.  "Although as you pointed out neither
of us are Medics, and our consideration of plausibility
has no expert basis."

"And I am quite sure," said Adams, "that you can rely on my
friend the plot designer to research it most carefully, so
there is also that.  Now we both know what, ideally, Nicole
should do -"

"- yes, Judge, as we are both experts -"

"- so let us skip discussing that," said Adams.  "Aumann's
Agreement and all that.  Instead, I would like to know how
far along you have managed to go in doing your own
impossible task: what is your current working hypothesis,
or set of hypotheses, about how our characters managed to
get into a boat in the middle of an unspecified ocean on
Earth, when we are both quite certain that no accident or
failure event occurred on the planetary drop pod?"

Verrens nodded.  "The first important thought which
occurred to me is that if there is no sabotage," he
said, "then perhaps it is a test of the emergency systems
of the planetary drop pod."

"Using actual paying customers, Judge Verrens?" said
Adams.

"Yes, Judge, that appeared to make it unlikely," said
Verrens.  "Using paying customers as guinea pigs, even
to ensure their safety in future drops, would be quite
unethical.  Such tests would, both ethically and
legally, require the voluntary acceptance of people for
that test.  A company considering such an illegal
action, of such magnitude, would be unlikely.  And even
if a company judged that doing it would be worth the
cost and the risk of being caught and punished, I would
expect that they would want more in exchange than just
some data regarding the safety of their drop pods."

"Yes," said Adams.  "So I suppose this cannot be your
actual working hypothesis.  Do you have one?"

"Yes," said Verrens.  "We know that there is a character
who has accepted that particular tests would be
performed on her."

"Which one is she?"

"Nicole Angel," said Verrens.  "She came to Earth in
order to take the Judgment Acceptance Examinations.  She
has accepted that particular tests will be performed on
her, as long as she may be given the vocation of Judge if
she is found worthy of the title."

"How is this relevant?" said Adams.  "It does not
include the testing of planetary drop pod safety
systems, does it?"

"No, Judge," said Verrens.  "What it does consist of are
three sub-tests: a written test of factual knowledge and
understanding, a brain scan to be performed by
Neurological Scientists to analyze the configuration of
the candidate's moral cores, and the third exam, the
secret examination: a mock test of the actual operations
of the moral cores, putting the candidate in situations
where their moral expertise is checked in conditions as
near to real-world as possible."

"And?"

"I think this novel portrays the mock test of Nicole's
Judgment Acceptance Examination."


Chapter 48

"No!" said Katja.  "You can't punish me.  You're my
accomplice!"

"I am not!" said Nicole.  "I did not act with an intent
to kill Raphael!"

"Aren't you a consequentialist?" said Katja.  "Your
actions lead to his death.  You are as culpable as I
am and thus unfit to pass Judgment on me!"

Anger boiled inside Nicole.  How dare Katja twist
consequentialism against a Judge!

It was obvious, then, that Katja was not an amateur
Judge, and had only the barest of basic knowledge
required for modern moral Judgment.

Nicole focused her anger, using it to support her
flagging, exhausted willpower, aware that this biased
her perceptions and reasoning to choose options that
were more aggressive, and less inclusive.

She did not have much of an alternative, after all.
If Michael hadn't irrationally insisted on accusing
Raphael earlier, she might have had more willpower
for the current situation - but he had, and she
needed to operate in a real universe that included
that fact.

What did pragmatic consequentialism mean, and what
would it conclude in this case?

"Katja," said Nicole, "modern pragmatic
consequentialism would determine that the
consequences of my action were different from
yours.  Your understanding is -"

"Nonsense!" said Katja.  "How can the consequences
be different when a single result occurred?"

"Katja," said Nicole, "the modern consequentialist
paradigm is different from your intuition based
solely on its etymology."

"You're trying to trick me!" said Katja.

"If I am," said Nicole, "then you wouldn't know
the difference, because right now you don't have
access to any other expert on morality other than
me.  I am sure the rest of the community will
continue to take my expert Judgment over your
non-expert, and not even amateur, speculations."

She stared at Katja.

"The modern pragmatic consequentialism paradigm,"
said Nicole, "bases the concept of right and
wrong on the projected consequences of your
chosen option, at the time of your choice."

"What is that supposed to mean, Nicole?" said
Katja.

"When you chose to attack Raphael," said Nicole,
"the consequence of your choice included his
death -"

"No it didn't!" said Katja.  "Inducing heart
arrythmia by external blunt force is unlikely to
occur.  And I'm the only expert at Medicine here,
so you can only accept that fact!"  She sneered
at Nicole.

"Unlikely but not impossible," said Nicole.
"And thus part of the weighted projected
consequences of your choice.  And I doubt that
there is any positive projected consequence of
pounding your fists into Raphael's chest."

"But that doesn't exonerate you!" said Katja.
"Our consequences were the same!"

"But our projected consequences, based on the
limited information we had at the time of our
choices, were not the same," said Nicole.  "You
had full information of the consequences of
hitting Raphael's chest in time with his
heartbeat: that there was a small but non-zero
probability of heart arrhythmia and death.  You
could fully predict the consequence from
choosing to hit Raphael's chest in time with the
heartbeat.  The only information that I had was
that it was a Medic doing it.  Restricted to
only that information, the only reasonable
consequence of helping you was that I would
prevent injury to Raphael."

"Oh," said Katja, "so you're casting yourself as
hero and me as villain, then?  Everything you do
is perfectly correct?"

"No," said Nicole.  "I could have checked if
what you were doing was actually saving his
life.  If I were more perfectly correct I would
have done so, and if I had inhumanly fast brain
responses then I would have been able to do so in
the time I had actually made my choice.  I could
have been better.  But what I did was far, far
less wrong than what you did, Medic."
